india s shock gdp growth rate is a crisis modi govt should not waste
text size  a  a the gross domestic product  gdp  growth numbers for the july september quarter  the lowest in    quarters  are no surprise. most analysts had   belatedly   forecast the bad news. it is now clear that if the government does not get its act together by budget day  two months from now  a quick recovery from the current depths should not be expected. the economy is on a cusp from where it can swing either way. nirmala sitharaman is on test.if we get past the schadenfreude with which many analysts greet the modi government s mounting economic problems  for being self inflicted  even critics will have to address the question  what should the government do  for starters  it should stop whistling in the dark. the global slowdown is not the primary cause of india s problems  or the gap with china s growth numbers    per cent for the same july september quarter  would not have risen as it has. nor would bangladesh be growing at more than   per cent. next  there is no point quibbling about whether this is just a slowdown or a full blown recession. when growth drops precipitously from  .  per cent to  .  per cent in four quarters  it is for all practical purposes a recession.don t expect the quick turnaround that many analysts were forecasting until recently. the current quarter s numbers may be no better than the last one s if one goes by the story in the steady trickle of data  and the full year will see the slowest growth since narendra modi came to power on the promise of double digit growth and achhe din  good days . the government has so far been the fastest growing part of the economy. but with the deficit target for the full year having been crossed in seven months  this cannot continue. the index of industrial production continues to bear grim tidings  as do the output numbers on the core sector. electricity consumption has slumped  diesel consumption is going nowhere  the trade numbers point to shrinkage  and manufacturing continues to stagnate or fall across key sectors. there is no good news on either the consumption or industrial front.also read  india s gdp grows at  .   in q   lowest in more than   yearswhile every downturn has a cyclical element to it  and there is some evidence of the automobile slump bottoming out  the fact is that much of the growth in reported bank credit is not going to industry  even as the scale of loan write offs accelerates. non banking financial companies are unable to pick up the slack  having seen a sharp shrinkage in their credit flow. companies are still de leveraging their balance sheets. till that process reaches near completion  don t expect fresh investment.while we wait for some of these cyclical factors to play themselves out to a receding horizon that stretches now to three or four quarters into the future  deeper structural issues wait to be addressed. agriculture has to deal with the fundamental issue of poor productivity and inadequate domestic demand  in part a result of stagnant rural wages . the government s tax revenue base is shot through with holes  and no one seems to know how to fix the good and simple tax s problems. the strength of services exports keeps the rupee pegged at a level at which manufacturing exporters find themselves unable to compete in export markets. reform of the public sector is a coat that hangs yet again on the peg of what happens to the employees of unviable firms. finally  as one business leader after another capitulates   from an ambani to a ruia  and from a thapar to a subhash chandra   the capacity of india s famed entrepreneurs to lead a growth charge is increasingly in question.the best advice one can give is that this is a crisis that should not be wasted. the modi government has acted so far as though it can ignore the bad economic news and coast along on its political and social agendas. it would be a pity if it continued to do that. a crisis is when a government can expect people to make some sacrifices for the larger good. the danger of doing nothing is that growth of   per cent or less becomes the norm  not the unacceptable.also read  manmohan singh has economy advice for pm modi   get rid of suspicion  trust indianssubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




before fixing economy  modi govt needs to tell us the truth about what is wrong with it
text size  a  a the indian economy is going through a phase in which it is difficult to spot a piece of good news. economic growth is slowing. exports continue to decline. retail inflation is on the rise. jobs are not growing. bank credit growth has decelerated. electricity use has dropped. tax revenues are growing at a slow pace   much less than what the budget had projected  making the government s target for fiscal deficit in the current year unachievable.the sentiment  a key factor in an economy  is also on a downswing. of course  a few steps have been taken by the government in the past few weeks like the cut in the corporation tax rates and the announcement of packages for reviving housing  real estate  automobiles and exports. but there has as yet been no respite from economic distress.what should the government do  different proposals to revive the economy are reportedly under consideration. they range from a package of additional investment for infrastructure  changes in income tax rates  policy reforms and privatisation. these measures will help  but their impact would not be immediate. before even ensuring an improvement in the key economic growth numbers  it will be important to address the current downbeat mood in the economy. economic sentiment is as important as the actual data on the economy. so  here is an attempt at listing out a couple of measures that the government should examine to start the process of reversing the downturn in the current mood.the first big step that the government must consider is to come out with a white paper on the state of the indian economy. various members of the government and several other institutions  including think tanks and rating agencies  have made different comments on the nature of the problem and the challenges that the indian economy faces at present. the markets and industry are not sure which narratives they must accept and which ones they can reject. this uncertainty has also helped fuel the negative sentiment on the economy.therefore  this is the ideal time for the government to come out with a status paper revealing what it believes to be the indian economy s actual condition and prospects. such a document can be prepared quickly and its credibility will be enhanced if the task is given to an independent economist who could prepare a report with the help of government economists  experts and officials in the finance ministry. remember the report by vijay l kelkar on the state of the economy during the winter of       the indian economy needs something similar.also read  global bond market looks to modi for greater access to indiasuch a report should help the government manage people s expectations from the budget  due to be presented in less than    weeks from now. these expectations are running high and it would be good to place these expectations in the context of the current state of the economy. a report on the economy by an independent expert will help present the current scenario and the challenges that lie ahead. the pre budget economic survey  to be presented just a day or two before the budget  will be a bit too late for managing such expectations.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe report will also help the government to take the country into confidence as far as the problems its own finances are suffering from are concerned. its revenue flows so far in the year do not inspire anybody s confidence about the government s ability to meet its fiscal deficit target of  .  per cent of gross domestic product  gdp  for        . different estimates on the government s revised fiscal deficit number and the extent of extra budget borrowings are doing the rounds.a status paper on the economy would be able to end all such speculation. instead of the budget revealing those numbers  it would be advisable to let the white paper on the indian economy bring out the bad news. that will also allow the budget to focus more on the policies that need to be reformed and the new expenditure packages that are necessary.the finance minister could even supplement the efforts of the white paper by acknowledging the stress in the fiscal system and reiterating the government s resolve to fix the economy.the second step that the government must take is not to turn away from such data that indicate an economic downturn. some months ago  a government survey showed that employment growth in the economy had seen a huge decline. the immediate reaction of the government was to describe the report as only a draft finding of the surveyors. a few months later  the government accepted the same report as final. that was a welcome step  just as the earlier attempt at denying the report was problematic.a few days ago  the government decided to junk its own survey on consumer spending  which showed a decline  because of data quality issues. such steps undermine the confidence of people and industry in the state of the economy. if there are data quality issues  the survey need not be junked  but supplementary efforts can be made to plug the data gaps if any.an economic slowdown cannot be addressed only by increasing investments and introducing policy reforms. equally important is the role of transparent communication to the people about the nature of the economic slowdown and the challenges arising from it. the goals of transparent communication can be achieved if the government comes out with a white paper on the current state of the economy and accepts economic data as well as survey findings.at the start of the first term of the narendra modi government  arun jaitley  finance minister at that time  had dropped the idea of bringing out a status paper on the economy s problems for fear that it would undermine the investor s confidence in the indian economy. that was a wrong move. investors always like clarity and transparency about the state of an economy. today  they will welcome any move that results in finance minister nirmala sitharaman producing a white paper on the indian economy.also read  modi govt plans to amend law to increase insurance cover for bank deposits from rs   lakhsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why modi has to douse many fires this week and skip photo ops with hasina   mamata
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi won t fly to kolkata to meet his bangladeshi counterpart sheikh hasina friday at the inauguration of a special pink ball test cricket match between the two countries.modi has too much on his plate right now  parliament  amit shah  with his talks about a nation wide nrc  irascible states  and the struggling economy.protest of the statesmodi won t be happy with the manner in which the map of india is changing colour recently. the saffron is giving away to doubt.janata dal  united  vice president prashant kishor tweeted that     plus states with more than     of india s population have non bjp chief ministers. wonder how many of them are consulted and are on board for nrc in their respective states   kishor was signalling that the bjp s ally in bihar wasn t happy with home minister amit shah s comment about the national register of citizens  nrc .nitish kumar s jd u  and ram vilas paswan s lok janshakti party  both bjp allies  have already said they will fight the jharkhand elections separately. now there s maharashtra  where the bjp s former ally  shiv sena  would rather form a government with the bjp s opponents  the nationalist congress party  ncp  and the congress.modi may have tried his charm on maratha stalwart and ncp leader sharad pawar   the two met for    minutes earlier this week when pawar invited him to a sugar factory inauguration in pune   but it doesn t seem to have worked.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe shiv sena will likely lead a government with the ncp and congress sooner than later  with the shiv sena getting the chief minister s post and the two allies a deputy chief minister s post each.the opposition is actually beginning to understand the message of modi s favourite philosopher kautilya  my enemy s enemy is my friend.as congress leader jairam ramesh conceded in this interview  the congress party took a long time to decide whether it should support the once  untouchable  shiv sena.also read  why india supports the invincible sheikh hasina who is censoring democracy in bangladeshnation wide confusioneven with the revolt of the allies  it s intriguing why modi continues to give amit shah such a long rope to continue stoking more fire on the nrc front. especially when it damages india s relationship with a neighbouring country with whom india wants to be close.amit shah  of course  remains unrepentant. certainly  his latest nrc statement targets the big non bjp ruled state  which also neighbours bangladesh   west bengal. shah believes west bengal is for the picking and the numbers certainly bear him out   in the last lok sabha election  the bjp increased its seats in parliament from   to    from the state.still  modi s ability to separate issues is legendary.when the nrc discovered    lakh  foreigners  in august  who had supposedly come into india from bangladesh over the years and the whole country was agog with the divisions it would cause  modi didn t even raise the subject with hasina when she visited delhi one month later.as hasina told the press at the time   everything is fine.  meaning  not only did modi not talk about the matter with her  no one was expected to be deported by india back into bangladesh.hasina s international affairs adviser gowher rizvi also told theprint that he was sure there were no illegal bangladeshis in india. he smiled as he said it  implying this was a domestic issue the bjp wanted to use politically. again and again  rizvi pointed out that bangladesh was doing so well on the home front  why would its people want to come to neighbouring india whose economy was in tatters he added   modi and hasina get along like a house on fire. also read  bangladesh s high gdp a fitting reply to amit shah s  termite  taunt at illegal immigrantsa missed photo opportunityif modi and hasina are indeed so close  why is the pm not going to kolkata  it s unlike him to pass up a photo opportunity flanked by two powerful women. after all  modi was in santiniketan only in may       as were hasina and mamata banerjee  all three inaugurating the bangladesh bhavan at visva bharati university.going to kolkata  even for a few hours and just for a cricket match  would normally be up modi s street. he has done much more for much less.meanwhile  look at the powerful photos that hasina and mamata s meetings will generate   mamata calls hasina  didi    when they come together three times today over the space of    hours. after their public      spat  the two women seem to be warming up nicely towards each other again.that should worry modi.also read  nrc to gst   how modi   amit shah create anxiety raj and still win electionsa busy weekit s been barely six months into the second modi government  and all is not well. the political tea leaves are stirring again. the single most important reason behind these first stirrings is the downslide in the economy and how this is beginning to seriously affect the lives of people.this has been a most interesting week to watch modi  but it isn t over  not yet. what if modi decides to upturn the apple cart yet again subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




nrc to gst   how modi   amit shah create anxiety raj and still win elections
text size  a  a it s as official as it can get  because home minister amit shah has said so in parliament. the national register of citizens   a citizenship crucible   will be repeated in assam  and be conducted across india now. the exercise will unleash  once again  a new set of anxieties among all indians  just like it did in assam. another trial by fire  even for those singed already.but the political question to ask is this  how do amit shah and narendra modi keep indians perpetually anxious and ensure that the voters still keep voting for them in elections  keep citizens busy  and make sure the report card reflects on them and not the bjp government.anxiety inducing solutionsit all began with demonetisation  then gst  ed raids  nrc  fear of pakistan  article      the talk of a new multi purpose digital id card  phone tapping  whatsapp surveillance  and the ayodhya verdict. many of these have been called bold and decisive solutions  but all of them have stirred disquiet  at least among a large section of indians. but bjp duo modi and shah have continued to top popularity ratings year after year and win many states and the lok sabha elections.the gst was part of a big bang reform that india has been working toward for years. but even after more than two years  the spiral of compliance paperwork that it has locked small businesses in is massive. the long  painful days after demonetisation  the queues and paperwork triggered by the nrc in assam remind you of the famous      painting called  house of stairs  by dutch artist m.c. escher   people busy climbing a claustrophobic maze of stairs  constantly going somewhere  arriving nowhere. that s india now.all this activity and anxiety that the modi government creates for the population in the middle of an economic slowdown  unemployment  downgrading of india s ratings by international agencies is a bit counter intuitive. this is the time when politicians should be calming the population  making them confident  not insecure. and this is also the time when the citizens should be questioning the government on delivery  not complying to prove their citizenship  honesty and patriotism.but pm modi did assure thousands of overseas indians in the  howdy  modi   event that in india  sab achha hai . all is well.there are three ways how this conundrum has worked for modi and how he gains people s confidence. i learnt this first when i was reporting on demonetisation  and again during the lok sabha election this year.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  article      ayodhya  modi   shah are done with political tasks. now  it is economy s turndecoupling modi from deliveryin people s minds  modi  and now amit shah  are above the mundane matrix of delivery of jobs  economic growth and well being. they have decoupled one of the most fundamental expectations that voters have from their leaders   tangible outcomes. i witnessed this first during demonetisation in     . so many villagers said   yes  we suffered  but modi is great.the same happened during the      lok sabha election campaign. the economic slowdown and loss of jobs weren t a factor at all  even though many articulated it. my colleague kritika sharma travelled to kota  rajasthan to interview scores of iit aspirants during the campaign. almost all of them complained about fears of not finding jobs in a slumpish market  but they also absolved modi of the responsibility of creating jobs. i feel the government cannot do much to change this situation. it totally depends upon the individual efforts of a student to be able to get a job   said one youth.this decoupling is deeply confounding for observers of politics. it means voters look at modi not as a politician but as a visionary leader  an elder statesman who is beyond performance expectations. he is not a project manager who needs to deliver.also read  modi shah s hyper nationalism is making india insecure when it is actually most secureask not what the country can do for youin the modi era  it is the citizens who must deliver and prove themselves worthy. it is they who must change india. he keeps people busy. by doing that  he creates a sense of purpose and activity among citizens. no wonder then that after the nrc final list was out in august  some residents in one posh south delhi rwa took on the task of identifying  true indians  themselves. they went to neighbouring slums asking people to show aadhaar cards  and posted these videos in their rwa whatsapp groups   followed by other residents saying that there needs to be an nrc in their neighbourhood. i was shown these exchanges. this is how modi shah s narratives keep the nation busy  including out of work vigilantes.the number of things modi government has made the citizens busy   complying with gst and citizenship paperwork  proving they are not hoarding dirty cash  not criticising the government on whatsapp and downloading telegram and signal instead  saying they stand with the indian army on social media dps even when they tie citizens to jeeps and drive them around  saying they stand with dilution of article     even when an entire population is cut off and politicians detained overnight.these tests of good citizenry stand in contrast after a decade of the silent and almost absent from public view manmohan singh era  when citizens did not know what he did or thought  and he didn t push them to do anything new either.the famous john kennedy mantra of  ask not what the country can do for you  can now be applied to modi shah   ask not what the government can do for you  but what you can do for the government.also read  why and how ideology is central to winning elections in indiaschadenfreude politicsthe other reason  schadenfreude  is the simplest one. if you are suffering  you should derive comfort from the idea that someone else is being punished. those who stood in the demonetisation lines felt chuffed that rich people were suffering too  though many rich people got away using their contacts in banks .if you are suffering while putting together your paperwork to prove you are a citizen  you should be happy that those  evil  bangladeshi muslim immigrants will suffer more.waiting for the revolutionthree decades ago  steve coll  my first american boss at the washington post asked me   where is the revolution   he asked me this every time he encountered government injustice  cruelty  incompetence and corruption in india.today  i have the answer. people are not questioning because they think by voting for narendra modi  they have ushered in the revolution already. modi is the revolution.and in many ways  he is. just not your traditional textbook revolution.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in sri lanka  modi s india must deal with reality as exists on ground  not as it wants it be
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi was the first to congratulate sri lanka s freshly elected president gotabaya rajapaksa  soon after the results of    november elections were declared. the former defence secretary  who remained in hot pursuit of the ltte and finished off the tamil terror group and the civil war in       is now on the hot seat in colombo.speculation is rife that gotabaya s brother  mahinda rajapaksa  will soon be the prime minister. although parliamentary elections in the island are due only next year  in       current pm ranil wickremesinghe can hardly continue  considering the vote has been against his party s sajith premadasa  who won    per cent of the votes     per cent less than gotabaya s tally.when wickremesinghe resigns  mahinda will take his place   or so goes the rumour mill in sri lanka.if and when that happens  the rule of the rajapaksas will be complete. they will rule their country with an iron hand. democracy will acquire a distinct nationalist edge. the chinese  whom mahinda rajapaksa invited to the island with open arms when he was the president  will be even more established.the first three points  actually  run astonishingly parallel to political developments in india. not only has narendra modi ruled india with a firm grip since he became pm  his version of democracy is far more nationalist than ever before.still  it would be too simplistic to say that modi and the rajapaksas are like peas in a pod   although both strong men don t hesitate to take action against ethnic and religious communities in their own countries.also read  india need not fear rajapaksa s win and sri lanka s embrace of chinawe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowa decade of peace in sri lankafact is  it was the manmohan singh government in       which looked the other way when brothers mahinda and gotabaya rajapaksa finished off the ltte. several human rights violations were committed in that war  including the killing of women and children. but the civil conflict had dragged on for too long  since     . delhi believed that the bloodshed must end  giving way to a new peace.that is what  indeed  happened. for    years  until the easter attack in april      in which more than     people were killed  sri lanka was peaceful. the tourists returned. mahinda rajapaksa was president for half that time  during which he laid out the red carpet for the chinese. new delhi saw that as rajapaksa thumbing his nose at india. he lost power soon after  in     .nearly five years later  the rajapaksas are back. in the interim  sri lanka has been wracked by several power struggles   so much so that until three weeks ago     year old wickremesinghe was unwilling to let the    year old sajith premadasa become the party candidate to fight gotabaya. there is another outcome of the      polls  the baton has after several decades passed on from wickremesinghe to a younger generation.so  is new delhi concerned that the rajapaksas are back and will take revenge for being pushed out of temple trees  the official residence of the sri lanka president pm  in       the answer  as always  lies in whether you are looking at the glass being half full or half empty.also read  another strongman rajapaksa returns to sri lanka  raising fears of tilt to chinait s wait   watch for india  sri lankafirst  india must deal with the situation as it exists on the ground  and not as it wants it to be.gotabaya rajapaksa was able to reap the fear that was the outcome of the easter attacks and leveraged his strongman image to tell sri lanka that he was the better man to deal with the situation. with a local islamist terror group having carried out the attacks  ties between sinhalese and muslims are also fraying  especially in the eastern province.india understands that  it has no particular problem with it.second  mahinda rajapaksa may have warmly welcomed the chinese into sri lanka a few years ago and asked them to help build the hambantota port as well as a new port city in colombo.today  though  it is unclear if the rajapaksas will openly push a pro china policy. remember gotabaya s pro india section in his election manifesto and the call modi made to him following his victory  signalling in no uncertain terms that new delhi accepts his overlordship in sri lanka.but the rajapaksas will be careful to see how the cookie crumbles in the indian ocean for another reason  which is to wait and see if india and the us are actually coming closer together to take on the chinese.if modi  indeed  takes that call with trump  it will signal another significant change in india s foreign policy. in that case  the rajapaksas are bound to moderate their own policies towards a us backed india.third  whether or not the rajapaksas push for a greater mainstreaming of the tamil population  delhi will certainly continue to put its money where its mouth is.several thousand houses have been built in the northern province  a new indian cultural centre is is coming up and  most interestingly  an alliance air flight has resumed its chennai to jaffna service after    years  rs       is the round trip ticket  only five days before sri lanka went to the polls on    november.certainly  the indian ocean has little respect for weak leaders. come to think of it  after china s xi jinping and modi  gotabaya rajapaksa is the third strongman who successfully rode the high political tide in these waters. at least in the near future  he will be the only ruler of sri lanka.also read   like china  india should invest across indo pacific to ensure regional security subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in modi s opposition mukt india  jnu must remain the eternal protester
enraged students. a defensive vice chancellor. policemen on campus. no  this is not a scene from the       tukde tukde  row in jawaharlal nehru university that led to the arrest of kanhaiya kumar  umar khalid over the supposed use of dangerous words like  azadi . it is from       and jnu has become bastille again in narendra modi s india.new india s war on left intellectuals refuses to leave the jnu campus in new delhi.it doesn t matter that its alumni include two of the leading lights of this government  nirmala sitharaman and s. jaishankar  ceo of niti aayog amitabh kant as well as nobel prize winner abhijit banerjee. yet  it seems to be on a daily collision course with the government  and increasingly with the aged students and alumni of whatsapp university.demonised by news channel anchors as the font of the tukde tukde gang and idolised by students who would otherwise not have access to such fine education at such a subsidised cost  jnu has emerged as the unofficial dissent central or the hub of anti nationals and  urban naxals  who while away their time on  taxpayers  money   if you d rather believe arnab goswami. through its vital and controversial students  such as kanhaiya kumar  umar khalid and shehla rashid  it was perhaps the first institution that questioned the rising nationalist narrative in post narendra modi india.with sometimes doctored videos and at other times  haranguing monologues  young students have not only been vilified but also imprisoned. teachers have been made to stick to the letter and spirit of regulations in the name of adhering to discipline  treated like minor government servants  and denied the freedom necessary for intellectual growth.also read  are jnu students justified in protesting steep but long overdue fee hike the liberalsbrand jnu  which once proudly stood for diversity and democracy  has been unmade  in polarised prime time debates  in toxic tweets  and in casual water cooler conversations. so much so  says jnu academic maitrayee choudhury  who has taught sociology there for    years  that when  our students go for job interviews  they are routinely heckled about jnu .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhat makes jnu such a red rag for the ideological bullies  is it jnu s supposedly left liberal agenda exemplified by academics such as romila thapar who has long been a bugbear for the sangh parivar and whose biodata the administration recently asked for despite having it on its own website  is it jnu students  propensity to vote for left liberal union representatives  or is it that the dominant narrative inside the university campus remains steadfastly at odds with the one outside  or is it all three the jawaharlal nehru university act       which brought jnu into being  has some key terms  national integration  social justice  secularism  democratic way of life  international understanding  and scientific approach to the problems of society. as choudhury told theprint   a visit to the campus would tell you the story of national integration. first generation learners from kalahandi to delhi s top end colleges  to students from the most distant villages of the northeast and madhya pradesh  to an astoundingly articulate  visually challenged young girl. these diverse students  with very different backgrounds and ideas  share their everyday lives  in hostels  in classrooms  in dhabas  in seminars.  it is an ongoing experience of  social justice  secularism  democratic way of life . for democracy is not an abstract idea. it is about its everyday enactment. it is about learning and unlearning prejudices and opening ourselves to  others . it is about informed argumentation. being equal citizens of a nation state is to live together and learn from each other   says choudhury.she pointed out the number of  international  students as well as the number of  globally recognised scholars  who teach in different academic institutions within and outside india including ivy league institutions   since this regime likes counting   and whose first tryst with social sciences was at jnu.kamal mitra chenoy  who taught in jnu between      and      as an associate and then as professor  says the trouble began in right earnest in january      when the new vice chancellor  mamidala jagadesh kumar  took office. chenoy told theprint   before       jnu was insulated by v cs and administration  who despite their faults  remained committed by and large to a  academic excellence  b  freedom of thought and creativity  even if it was in opposition to prevailing ideas  c  autonomy of choice for students and faculty  within the broad norms of university functioning  d  democratic functioning  where there was established institutional process for discussion and agreement and even disagreement  e  decentralised approach  f  social policy of affirmative action for sc  st  women  poor  obc  g  inclusive and transparent functioning  and h  critique and acceptance of values of social and gender equality.  chenoy came under fire from the narendra modi government for calling the      gujarat riots a  genocide  and the administration  anti muslim .also read  after jnu  jadavpur university is the new  left  bastion everyone wants to stormthe aspirantsjnu was created by diplomat g. parthasarathy who  as the first vice chancellor  brought in prominent intellectuals and situated them in various schools of learning in jnu. among the later vcs  k.r. narayanan followed this practice  before going on to become the president of india.it was felt that this is how institutions should be built. however  all these practices  says chenoy  have been replaced by the new v c and his team.  he has been supported by the ministry of human resource development and some sections of the sangh parivar. so  decision making is centralised. no elected representative is engaged in conversation with the v c or is an actual part of the decision making process. decisions are imposed.  there is an atmosphere of manufactured pr that shows jnu as a great university  whereas in practice  all its traditions are undermined every day  he said.these are traditions that have allowed kanhaiya kumar  the son of a begusarai farmer and an anganwadi worker  and shehla rashid  the daughter of kashmiri muslims  to become young champions of democracy. they have enabled abhijit banerjee  the son of two kolkata economists  to win a nobel prize  and a journalist  p. sainath  to become the faithful chronicler of india s forgotten farmers. they have produced finance ministers in a state  thomas isaac  and at the centre  nirmala sitharaman  and ensured political parties have enough talent to choose from  whether it be prakash karat s cpi m  or yogendra yadav s swaraj india. journalist and author sanjaya baru told theprint that jnu not only taught him critical thinking but also gave him the confidence to think for himself.  it is a great institution that has opened its doors to several generations of less privileged students   baru said.what sets jnu apart is that a minister s daughter and a sweeper s son eat on the same dining table and sit on the same bench  creating equal opportunity. the government s supporters are suggesting that only students from  poor families  should be allowed to enter jnu.  they clearly don t understand how that would mean closing the doors to social mobility for the poor  by closing off socialisation between the rich and the poor   former jnu student shehla rashid told theprint.  the current debate around the hike in hostel fees is not really a debate about the quantum of fee  but about the right to education and whether the poor and the disadvantaged in this country will continue to have it. some people have suggested that only students below the poverty line should study at jnu   this is an apartheid model similar to that in government run schools  which are segregated by class   she said.more than that  rashid pointed out  as a woman  even if you re not from a poor background  but you want to continue your education  your parents may not support it because of negative attitudes toward women s education. so  the only hope is a public university. since university rules do not allow students to work outside  they cannot even support themselves.  so  if you look at it from a gendered perspective  it s not simply about class. it s also about resisting family pressure   she added.these strengths are what jnu s critics believe have led to the university s undoing.also read  time modi   amit shah stop abusing lutyens  delhi. they are the new power elite in capitalthe  unemployables madhu kishwar did her postgraduation from jnu in the     s and was nominated in      to the academic council to represent the school of arts   aesthetics as an outside expert for two years. she told theprint   the character of jnu changed dramatically after it introduced a very radical policy of reservations that give special weight not just on caste but also backward region and income. this system  of deprivation points introduced  has brought in students from small towns and even educationally impoverished villages of india. the diverse social composition could have been an asset had these students received a good education at school level or if they could study in their mother tongue. but many of them are poorly educated and have very inadequate linguistic skills to handle the courses at jnu. many of them who get entry into jnu despite very low marks  kishwar pointed out  need extra coaching just so that they can follow what is being taught.  but since  freedom  has come to be interpreted as the freedom to bunk classes  spend night after night doing addabazi at the famous all night dhabas  engaging in the most immature kind of politics based on worn out clich s many of them are unable to cope with their academic pressures.  also increasingly  she goes on  many in the social sciences get admitted to jnu so that they can prepare for civil services exams through coaching centres. the highly subsidised living makes it attractive for them to prolong their stay for as long as they can. consequently  classes are not of much importance.even today though  madhu kishwar concedes  jnu attracts some of the brightest students.  but those who are truly serious about their studies keep a safe distance from politics. jnu politics is not only infantile but also increasingly destructive. it is well known that jnu has sleeper cells of all kinds of subversive anti india political outfits. the student groupings are front organisations for communist parties  maoists  kashmiri separatists  northeast insurgent groups and other break up india forces. getting addicted to them makes jnu students social misfits.  she says jnu students will soon find themselves to be among the unemployables of india if the university doesn t change.also read  after hostel fee hike  jnu will become india s most expensive central universitythe eternal protestersit is the resistance to change that bothers those on the opposite end of jnu s political spectrum. anand ranganathan  who is a professor at jnu s special centre for molecular medicine  says a place of learning where only one kind of view is welcome is not a university but a  conformity . he points to the vandalising of the soon to be inaugurated statue of swami vivekananda and calls it  heart breaking to say the least . as he told theprint   witnessing the unbelievable vandalism and defacing of the walls of prominent jnu buildings is shocking and sad at the same time. this is not the way to handle or solve disagreements  besides it being a violation of the law. a university is a place of learning  it is a place where differing views must be held and respected and deliberated. precisely what jnu was  and should remain. as choudhury says   what is happening is destruction of a university that has mentored and produced indian citizens who could think  reflect and care. the secession of the indian middle class from the poor and marginalised has not yet taken place here. the connect between what plagues indian society and the university remains. this regime does not like that. and that precisely is its greatest value in the era of anti intellectualism and pro right forces. in the absence of a strong political opposition  jnu remains in splendid isolation as an eternal protester.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




arvind kejriwal is almost exactly the same package that modi offers  minus hindutva
on one side of the pink bus ticket issued free to women passengers in delhi is a picture of its chief minister  arvind kejriwal. his statement appears above it   main chahta hoon ki aap aur aapka parivar khub tarakki karein. jab mahilayein aage badhengi  tabhi desh aage badhega.   it is my wish that you and your family make progress. it is when women move ahead that the country moves ahead.  some   million women ride delhi s public buses daily   of the    million residents of the city.the campaign  transparently a build up to the delhi elections  due in february  reminds one of the pictures of narendra modi looking down at you with a self satisfied smile from hoardings put up at        petrol pumps across the country. in a lower corner of the hoardings  women who have received subsidised cooking gas cylinders thank modi  as though it is personal largesse. the hoardings had to be pulled down at election time in the summer  but are back.the aam aadmi party s  aap s  kejriwal is a political alternative to modi  at least in delhi. but consider the many ways in which they are similar. the state government has introduced an all costs paid chief minister s tirth yatra to sundry places of pilgrimage  mathura vrindavan  rishikesh haridwar  anandpur sahib  and ajmer sharif. you might think it is none of a secular state s business to be sponsoring religious pilgrimages  and there would be howls of protest if modi were to do something similar. in fact  the congress spent money for years on a haj subsidy  which the modi government scrapped last year   and just as well too. still  we are into sarva dharma sama bhava  not a hard western style secularism. so everything goes.also read   anarchist  to administrator   arvind kejriwal gets a makeover  with inspiration from modithen  consider rival strands of populism. where the modi government offers free toilets  free medical insurance  and free doles to farmers  kejriwal offers free electricity  and free bus and metro rides. modi does not ask where his bankrupt government will find the money  and kejriwal  who runs delhi with three times the national per capita income  does not ask why such freebies are needed. is it that he does not feel the need for more money  after all  property taxes in the city have remained unchanged for    years   without even any indexation for inflation both leaders are prone to exaggerated claims. we have heard for five years about       mohalla clinics being set up  but their number totals fewer than       or less than one a week  sounds suspiciously like the claims about the country being open defecation free  or aadhaar saving the government a tonne of money  as for the public buses on which women can now ride with free tickets  no bus has been added to the city s       strong fleet since        apparently because the state government doesn t know where it would park them.as for operational style  while modi has converted a cadre based party into one that sings his hosannahs from sunrise to sunset  kejriwal has converted what was a mass movement against corruption  and for a change in political culture  into a party over which he holds untrammelled sway.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin short  kejriwal is almost exactly the package that modi offers  personal aggrandisement  the building of a personality cult through full page newspaper ads day after day  populist schemes involving subsidies  whether affordable or required   abandonment of secular principles  exaggerated claims  and no checks on leadership. is there a method to this careful mimicking of style and substance  perhaps  because at the time of the last election  kejriwal had mentioned that his voter base was the same as that of the bjp.there is a difference  though. the hard edge to the bjp s communalism is missing in aap  there are no pehlu khans or mohammed akhlaqs being killed here. so perhaps muslims feel safer with aap   though  ironically  the police in the city are controlled by amit shah  equally important  where the bjp s education programme is occupied with such projects as wiping out the hated nehru from history books  aap has focused on improving the education imparted in government schools. we should celebrate that difference.also read  here s how delhi govt can make its free bus ride scheme for women a financial success toosubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




what s common between apj abdul kalam and narendra modi
it has been a little more than four years since former president a.p.j. abdul kalam passed away. but his cult only seems to grow bigger in india. there is no former president  not even a celebrated scientist  who is as popularly remembered as a.p.j. abdul kalam.what explains the cult of kalam  what explains reactions like this one    days to abdul kalam sir s vision     . feels like yesterday we studied that in school. fuck. time is flying people.   siddharth   ssaig     october     if his religious identity was the only reason kalam was liked  you wouldn t see people recalling his      book  india     . the banal book co written with y.s. rajan had the usual ideas for economic development you find in endless sarkari documents. how bright were kalam s ideas is not the point here. we are asking why so many young people continue to be enamoured of kalam and his words.also read  how this simple  god loving indian muslim left behind such an enduring legacythat is the mantragayatri mohan  a class    girl who aspires to be a scientist  takes the mic and asks   sir  i would like to hear from you a few tips for the upcoming generation to succeed in life. a.p.j. abdul kalam replies   to succeed in life you have to do four things. repeat with me  i will have great aim. i will continuously acquire knowledge. number three  i will do hard work. i will persevere. i will succeed. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now thank you sir   the student replies. ok  that is the mantra   kalam says.this is the beginning of a    minute video of a      event where kalam answered questions by students. it is the most watched video related to a.p.j. abdul kalam on youtube  with    million views.the cult of kalam is not about his achievements as a scientist  there are many scientists out there . it s not about his being a former president  who remembers pratibha patil  . it s not about his religious identity  hindutva today doesn t even need  good  muslims . the cult of kalam is about how he became a motivational speaker for a generation of young indians. his presidency only added to his career as a motivational author and speaker. today  there are motivational speakers who use kalam s words to run their business as a motivational speaker  a.p.j. abdul kalam gave young students the most addictive psychotropic substance  hope.karl marx was wrong. religion is not the opium of the masses. hope is the opium of the masses. as the hindustani saying goes  the world lives on hope.to sell a dream in      that india can become a developed country by       is to sell the drug of hope. to tell teenagers that they will live in a wealthy  prosperous country in the prime of their adult life is to give them a reason to strive for success. his life journey from a town in tamil nadu to rashtrapati bhavan via the nuclear programme is part of the cult  it certainly gave him the credibility a seller of hope needs.kalam must have loved the high it gave him to play the part of a hero. when he died of a cardiac arrest at    years of age  he was delivering a speech in iim shillong.the cult of kalam is not to be taken lightly. a    minute long audio of gulzar reading kalam s autobiography in hindi has over   million views. by the millions  people are watching videos with titles like   last eight hours of kalam s life    apj abdul kalam s top    rules for success    bangla motivational video on apj abdul kalam   and so on.and you have to see the comments on these videos to believe them.  i miss you sir   writes prashant anand.  i am unlucky that i can t meet him   writes ameya bhagwat.  the gem of modern india   writes sachin dubey.  a person with zero haters   writes monster z.  it s being  yrs ago he left   he is the real leader no one can equal to him even for      yrs   writes devraj ynwa.  i request youtube to remove the dislike button on this video   writes karthikeyan mitran.  i don t know why tears roll down when i hear your voice  sir    writes prathyush. on that gulzar video  the popular demand is to make kalam s autobiography part of the school syllabi. you will find such comments pouring in all over the internet even today  many from people who say they were inspired by kalam in their youth.also read  the good muslim bad muslim binary is as old as nehrumany flavours of the same drugas the cult of kalam keeps growing since his death  he is seen as a modern day saint. like babas and gurus  like osho or sri sri ravi shankar. babas and gurus  incidentally  sell the same drug  hope  with spiritual tadka . spiritual leaders create vast empires out of selling hope.there s another person who made a cult figure out of himself by selling hope  narendra modi. this is the political flavour of the same drug. just as kalam used to package his drug as  india        modi does it as  india       and now that      is close  it s been re packaged as     trillion economy by      . every alternate sunday  modi sells a heated dose of hope drug on his radio programme  mann ki baat. we indians love waiting for godot.the more destitute you are  the more you need hope. it is by selling hope that modi wins votes even though he s actually destroying hope by driving the economy into a structural slowdown. those who think the bjp s growing hegemony over indian politics shall be countered by propping up an unnatural alliance in maharashtra  should read the comments on a.p.j. abdul kalam s youtube videos. defeating modi needs the selling of a new and improved version of the hope drug.also read     things modi has promised to achieve by     kalam and secular politicsa retired scientist hailed for his role in the      nuclear tests  kalam was the president from      to     . the atal bihari vajpayee government didn t have the numbers in parliament to make anyone they liked the president of india. kalam was not the first choice of either the bjp  or the rss  or the congress. his name for rashtrapati bhavan was proposed by mulayam singh yadav of the samajwadi party to break the deadlock over the presidential elections.many left liberals and muslims have long seen apj abdul kalam as a kind of secular betrayal. he came across as  culturally  more hindu than muslim   just how the rss wants indian muslims to be. in a majoritarian india  it is felt  muslims have to deny their muslim ness and  as if that s not enough  appear to be  culturally hindu  and recognise that their forefathers had converted from the hindu faith  out of either choice or  perhaps  duress.for left liberals  kalam seemed to legitimise the hindutva government of vajpayee  particularly as he became president soon after the gujarat pogrom in     .  kalam had something to say about that later. there may be some truth to this argument  but that does not fully explain the mass cult of kalam among youth from north to south india. kalam s political critics are unfair to him. had he been made president by a congress government  they would have hailed him as a symbol of indian syncretism and secularism. in fact  the ever rising cult of kalam shows us how a mix of hope and inclusive nationalism can wade through hindu muslim polarisation.only the   rd most watched video about kalam on youtube is about his religious identity. the   year old animated educational video  targeted at children  has  .  million views.it s based on his poem  a lesson for my teacher  about a childhood memory of religious discrimination. a school teacher asks a muslim cap wearing kalam not to sit in class next to his best friend  son of the head priest of the shiva temple. the head priest gets to know this and tells the school teacher to let kalam sit next to his son  and even makes the teacher apologise to kalam.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




a dalit laid first brick for ram mandir. now  modi must appoint a dalit woman as its priest
text size  a  a this cannot be the dream ending of the ram mandir movement for prime minister narendra modi  who as a young rss bjp karyakarta took part in it during the first few years.though he hailed the supreme court decision  the whole process of ayodhya closure lacks modi s signature touch. the credit goes to the court.speaking to the bbc  former vhp leader praveen togadia lamented that if the temple had to be constructed by a court decree then why did so many people die in the process.but all is not lost. modi can still bring his unique stamp to how the ayodhya solution is implemented. if he truly wants to unroll his sabka saath sabka vikaas mission  then ayodhya is a good test case. he should appoint a dalit woman as the head priest of the grand new ram mandir. and i can suggest a dalit sanskrit scholar who is perfect for the job.mandal vs kamandalappointing a dalit woman priest will be the right tribute to a movement that saw a dalit kar sevak from bihar  kameshwar chaupal  laying the first brick for the shilanyas of the proposed ram mandir.it was no coincidence  but a deliberate  well thought out move by the rss vhp. among the rabble rousing leaders of the ram mandir movement  the most aggressive role was played by those from the lower castes  like kalyan singh  uma bharti  vinay katiyar and sadhwi ritambhara.now  appointing a dalit woman as the head priest of the ram mandir would be a fitting finale to the politics that began in the mandal kamandal era. especially  if the move is initiated by modi  a leader who washed the feet of dalit sanitation workers.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowas the ram rath yatra coincided with the implementation of the second backward classes commission report  popularly known as the mandal commission report  the bjp had no other option but to give representation to lower caste leaders to attract people. to counter the mandal  the kamandal of the bjp had to be reinvented with lower caste groups placed at the centre.also read  why mathura or varanasi temple disputes won t go the ayodhya wayvarna system   ram mandir movementthis is not an unfamiliar phenomenon around the world. in       the catholic church for the first time in its history decided that a latin american  argentinian to be specific  would lead the catholics of the world.if we dig deep  we will find that the north american church  which initially quoted the bible to give moral credence to slavery  later took on the role of a saviour for the blacks and the persecuted. black churches played a seminal role in organising protests against segregation and disenfranchisement of the blacks.many of the leaders of the civil rights movement  including martin luther king  jr.  were pastors. a whole set of pastors became part of the movement that called for emancipation of the downtrodden in south america  this religious movement later came to be known as liberation theology.the rss pays lip service to the cause of liberating dalits or people from other backward classes  while constantly holding up the hegemonic structures and the vedic past of hinduism. but the rss does need the support and consent of a section of dalits. this is necessary not because of any moral compulsion  but because of electoral politics  where numbers have a predominant role to play. this also fits into the scheme of things of the varna  caste  system  wherein manual labour and cumbersome  many a times even dirty  tasks have to be performed by the shudras and untouchables.the idea of the varna system is reproduced in the ram mandir movement too. those heading the temple movement   be it top political leaders  strategists or the core committee of the vhp s dharma sansad   came exclusively from the upper castes. vhp s ashok singhal  ram janmabhoomi nyas s ramchandra das paramhans  and bjp s atal bihari vajpayee and l.k. advani are just some examples.in contrast  the rabble rousers and the foot soldiers belonged to middle and lower castes. this also explains the symbolism of asking a dalit to lay the first brick for the proposed ram mandir.to date  no sociological data  indian sociology has its own biases  as articulated by noted sociologist professor vivek kumar  has been compiled on the composition of the foot soldiers of the movement  otherwise  it would have provided us with valuable empirical data and insights into the event that changed the course of history in india.also read  after ram mandir  next on vhp agenda   reconstruction of j k temples  cow protectioncan modi do the unthinkable the ram janmabhoomi movement is still widely regarded as an rss vhp led  singhal advani movement  which found denouement in the supreme court.is there anything modi can do now modi should form a trust  which will appoint the priest. he can form the trust with members of his preference and persuade them to appoint a dalit woman as the head priest of the ram mandir.modi knows the importance of symbolism. he bows too often in front of portraits and statues of b.r. ambedkar. he has famously said that only because of ambedkar  he could become the prime minister of india. he is building five memorials  panchteerth  to pay homage to ambedkar.he can now consider appointing kaushal panwar as the priest of the new ram mandir. she is from the valmiki community. after all  we all know about ram only because valmiki had immortalised him through ramayana. kaushal panwar is a doctorate scholar of sanskrit and has thorough knowledge of the dharma shastra and m m  s   and is well versed in nigama and agama  knowledge of vedas .she has delivered speeches in top universities of the world and teaches at delhi university. she recounted the horrors of the hindu caste system in satyamev jayate  a show hosted by aamir khan.she has told me that she can do shastrarth  religious debate  on live tv with anyone who aspires to become the head priest of the ram mandir. modi will be happy to know that she is a known ambedkarite and believes in annihilation of caste. she can be the right choice for the head priest in ayodhya.it all started on   november      with a dalit  kameshwar chaupal  putting the first brick for the proposed ram mandir. exactly    years later  on   november       the supreme court delivered the ram mandir to hindus. it is only natural that a dalit head priest now offers prayers at the temple.will modi do the unthinkable again also read  modi govt begins consultations to form ram temple trust  politicians to be kept out of itthe author is an adjunct professor  dept of mass communications at makhanlal chaturvedi national university of journalism and communication  mcnujc   bhopal. he is the former managing editor of india today hindi magazine  and has authored books on media and sociology. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




article      ayodhya  modi   shah are done with political tasks. now  it is economy s turn
text size  a  a good politics  it is often said  makes for good economics. while this can often be true  a lot depends on what one means by good politics. in narendra modi s first term as prime minister  his politics revolved around themes like anti corruption  anti cronyism  tax compliance  and pro poor schemes like ujjwala  ayushman bharat and jan dhan. but was that good politics resulting in good economic outcomes  the jury is out  for after small spikes in economic growth  we ended up with a cyclical and structural slowdown. we are yet to see the light at the end of this tunnel.in the end  modi again had to use cultural and nationalistic cues to get him across the majority mark in the lok sabha elections. it was good politics   good in the way he defined it   that enabled him to cross the finish line comfortably. not good economics.in his second term  where the country s economic problems are looking tougher than ever  it is good economics alone that will enable good politics. if modi gets his economic act together over this year and the next  the economy will be trundling along smoothly from fiscal         or calendar      at the latest.the good news is that modi and his home minister have got the political bits done early in the second term  which means that the prime minister and his finance minister  nirmala sitharaman  can now fully concentrate on taking the economy forward.also read  ayodhya to kashmir   modi is now mr closure for all of india s historical wrongsthe two big moves in the first six months of modi  .  were the evisceration of article     and the supreme court s unanimous judgement in the ayodhya case  which hands over the ram janmabhoomi to hindus and compensates muslims with five acres of land elsewhere.while it is easy to give all the credit to the court   which is obviously necessary   the reality is that courts are convinced by arguments  and most of the arguments in any case comes from the lawyers representing various parties. the fact that the court bought the arguments of the hindu side more than those proffered by the muslim side suggests that the former got a lot of help from various quarters   including possibly the government   to pitch their arguments in the right way. in the end  it was the guarantee of the government handling the post verdict fallout safely that would have emboldened the five judge bench to arrive at the right conclusion.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe link between these two political events   article     and ram mandir   and future economic policy making is indelible.by ticking off two boxes in the sangh parivar s agenda  what modi and amit shah have essentially bought themselves is freedom to get on with big reforms on the economic front   reforms that may not be to the parivar s liking. modi s adroit move of withdrawing from the china dominated regional comprehensive economic partnership  rcep  also silenced the sangh s economic think tank  the swadeshi jagran manch.the sangh is uncomfortable with free market economics or privatisation or labour and land market reforms. it tends to be more socialist and nationalistic in its thinking. but if india has to lift itself from the economic ditch it finds itself in  it has to embrace bold reforms.also read  for modi and bjp  remaking indian society is more important than remaking the economyfor example  if bharat petroleum is to be sold  we can get the best price only if well funded bidders like saudi aramco can seek to own it. investment by a wahhabi state is hardly what the sangh would want  but getting a good price for your assets means allowing people you may not like to also bid.while tax cuts for the middle class may be popular  the big corporate tax cuts announced in september could hardly have been very popular with the sangh  which tends to be suspicious of multinational corporations in general. highly profitable foreign owned companies will be the biggest beneficiaries of this tax cut.labour market reforms will also be stiffly opposed by the unions  and the sangh runs the country s biggest one   the bharatiya mazdoor sangh. but by delivering article     and the ram mandir  modi has given the sangh its key demands  and can thus expect it to look the other way when difficult reforms are put through.so  here s a prediction  between now and the next budget  india could see some of the biggest economic reforms in modi  . . modi has covered his political flanks and earned the enthusiastic support of its political base for his political moves post may. he can now do what needs to be done on the economic front.the author is editorial director  swarajya. he tweets at  thejaggi. views are personal.this article was first published in swarajya.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in brazil for brics summit  modi s mind will be on maharashtra and eyes on sri lanka
text size  a  a as prime minister narendra modi travels to brazil wednesday for the brics summit  his tenth visit abroad since he came to power again six months ago  he will be keeping one eye on the unfolding political crisis in maharashtra. because what happens in maharashtra will not only have an impact on politics in india   elections in jharkhand and delhi are around the corner   but it will also influence the modi government s reputation abroad.but there s another story that s waiting to be told this week and that is the presidential elections in sri lanka that takes place on    november.also read  how asia transformed from the poorest continent to a global economic powerhousea crucial election next doorfew other places have had such a grip on india s imagination like sri lanka   not just because of the ramayana connection but because of the contemporary ethnic conflict between the majority sinhalese and the minority tamils  and the more recent chinese push into the pearl drop island that simulates paradise in the indian ocean.the top contenders are gotabaya rajapaksa of the sri lanka podujana peramuna  slpp   the powerful former defence minister and brother of the formidable former president mahinda rajapaksa  and united nationalist party  unp  candidate sajith premadasa  cabinet minister for housing  construction and cultural affairs and son of former president ranasinghe premadasa  who was assassinated by a suicide bomber on may day in     .with four days to go for the voting  the contest in sri lanka is said to have become very close.the never ending controversy about gotabaya s us citizenship has resurfaced  with a buddhist monk sitting on a fast demanding proof from the presidential candidate that he has indeed renounced it. the women voters are said to be somewhat aloof to gotabaya s nationalist rhetoric. and then there is the response to the terrible easter sunday attacks in april  in which more than     people were killed by suicide bombers owing allegiance to a local militant islamist group  national thowheeth jama ath.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowgotabaya s election manifesto promises to improve relations with india. he probably suspects that one of the reasons for his brother mahinda rajapaksa s shock defeat to maithripala sirisena of the new democratic front  ndf  in      was due to delhi s unhappiness with mahinda s increasing proximity to china. although mahinda rajapaksa returned as prime minister in      for a few weeks  ironically brought back by sirisena  sri lanka s supreme court and its lawmakers refused to second the move and brought back ranil wickremesinghe in the pm s chair.also read   like china  india should invest across indo pacific to ensure regional security new delhi can t look awaydelhi has worked closely with both rajapaksa brothers before. mahinda was president and gotabaya was defence minister when the    year long war against the ltte was finally won in     . manmohan singh as the prime minister  pranab mukherjee as the external affairs minister and shiv shankar menon as the national security advisor held their noses as the rajapaksa brothers carried out the mother of all human rights violations against the ltte cadres  including the killing of prabhakaran s    year old son.meanwhile  western countries  including norway  hoped that prabhakaran s family could be given safe passage out of jaffna. but the indian naval fleet had blockaded that route   allowing the rajapaksas to finish off the terror group that had also assassinated former prime minister rajiv gandhi.this potboiler tale now has a second chapter. wickremesinghe has given way to premadasa jr to be the unp s presidential candidate  but still hopes he can somehow be the prime minister. but sajith has the support of the moderate tamil parties  the tamil national alliance  and hopes he can bring them further into the mainstream.the irony is compounded because sajith s father  ranasinghe premadasa  was believed to have been keeping connections with the ltte and encouraged them to fight the indian peace keeping force in sri lanka in the late     s. according to shekhar gupta  writing here  sajith s father even supplied arms to the ltte  but the tamil lankan terrorist group didn t spare him either  sending out a suicide bomber with a cyanide capsule to assassinate him in may     .certainly  it isn t fair to judge the    year old sajith through the prism of his father s actions. and yet  india is very quiet   memories of the past are still strong in some parts of the government. once upon a time  strong men like former foreign secretary and high commissioner to sri lanka j.n. dixit revelled in the description of  viceroy   these days  high commissioner taranjit sandhu would rather focus on trade  humanitarian aid  tourism and cutting ribbons for the entry of pvr cinemas into sri lanka.also read  india only cares about national interest. and nepal has been at the receiving end of itkeeping china at baynot that delhi isn t resisting the expanding presence of the chinese here. on the eve of pm wickremesinghe s india visit in october       colombo reversed its decision to award the building of        houses to the indian construction firm nd enterprises  after first giving it to the china railway beijing engineering group co.sri lanka knows well  as does the rest of the world  that the chinese method is to loan large sums of money and cheap labour to the country it wants to woo  build highways and roads and opera houses  there s a lovely one in the heart of colombo . and when loan repayment becomes difficult  ask for equity in exchange.it s how china has tried to take over the hambantota port in southern sri lanka  the home district of the rajapaksas. it s how china is expanding the colombo harbour and building a port city that will be double the size of the capital.that s why it s important  even as the maharashtra crisis unfolds  to pay heed to the tiny country strategically located in the heart of the indian ocean. the presidential elections later this week are a start.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




fakiri to sarkari  how coke ad maker prasoon joshi became modi s poet of choice in new india
text size  a  a if you want to rewrite history  you must find court poets. the nehru memorial museum and library in new delhi has been at the heart of that rewriting mission under the narendra modi era. so  it is natural for it to bring in prasoon joshi as a member of the newly reconstituted board of a museum that stores cardinal archives. who better than a poet  whose lyrics most of india sings  to be the memory maker of new india from  thanda matlab coca cola  to modi nama  joshi has seamlessly transitioned from an ad man and lyricist to a man who knows the power of his words in a nationalist india. i have worked with prasoon joshi for three films   rang de basanti  delhi    and bhaag milkha bhaag. all three were different in nature. he is versatile and adapted to each with a fresh approach. that s where his style lies  being true to the subject. i am glad that one could tap into the burning poet in him  which takes him beyond just writing lyrics for bollywood   rakeysh omprakash mehra told theprint on joshi s new post.clearly  there are some who seek legitimacy from the establishment. there are others whom the establishment seeks for legitimacy.also read  crocodile lover  fakir  now a man of wild for bear grylls   modi and the power of makeoversthe preferred laureatepadma shri awardee prasoon joshi is currently the pro bono chairman of central board of film certification  cbfc .  my legacy will be smoother machinery  which will have lesser glitches   he said on what he wants to do in the cbfc. his tenure as chairman has seen very few controversies  especially if you measure it against his predecessor   pahlaj nihalani. joshi has even said that the film industry has been unfair to women.at the same time  joshi  along with    other celebrities  also wrote to pm modi against  selective outrage  of some of their compatriots on lynchings in india.  to us  the undersigned  this document of selective outrage comes across as an attempt to foist a false narrative  to negatively portray prime minister modi s untiring efforts   the letter said.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowto many  joshi s shift from a man who can write the revolutionary khoon chala of rang de basanti to the tear jerker maa of taare zameen par        to a poem for modi   saugandh mujhe is mitti ki  main desh nahin mitne dunga   has been jarring. but he has done it effortlessly.he is as much part of the old regime  being part of the three member creative committee for the opening and closing ceremonies of the      commonwealth games along with javed akhtar and shyam benegal  as he is a fixture in the new establishment  on call for any national poetic service. and that makes prasoon joshi the preferred laureate.in a      interview with modi in london for bharat ki baat sabke saath  joshi uttered the now immortal and meme worthy line    modi ji  ek fakiri hai aapke swabhav mein . he is ever ready to market uttar pradesh to the world or to write lyrics to popularise swachh bharat in     .and why wouldn t the bjp call on him he s after all the man who redefined advertising with its confident and assertive  thanda matlab coca cola  in       which was a step up from the      aspirational pepsi slogan  dil maange more  in that it claimed the world with a new  millennial  it empowered  insouciance new establishment.as he said in an interview recently   khali shabd kuch nahin hota. if you don t have the right emotion behind them  the words will be hollow. the right time  the right emotion  and right delivery is what makes it. he also signifies perennial positivity. as he said in an interview recently   the critics  shops need to shut down and we need positivity malls. also read  from nehru to modi  bollywood always faced political attacks but this capitulation is newadvertising indiajoshi  who grew up in almora  studied bsc and then did a masters in physics  only to move on to an mba at the institute of management technology in ghaziabad before he discovered advertising. he understood that it was the place for a bilingual young man who was bringing with him the aura of small town india and the understanding of its people. in an interview to india today in       he said small towns represented an india that was modernised but not westernised.  we embrace western culture but put our own spin to it. and i don t think there is anything downmarket about it   he said.as the world moved towards discovering diversity and authenticity  joshi with his childhood steeped in literature and music  had suddenly become cool. awards followed for his campaigns  whether it was the coca cola campaign or the happydent commercial. his talent has seen him rise to the very top of his profession  wherein he is now ceo and cco of mccann india.he was at the forefront of crafting the bjp s ad strategy for the      and      lok sabha elections.joshi has his admirers. senior journalist and author vikas jha calls him an outstanding lyricist  a poet par excellence and an intelligent adman.  prasoon knows how to connect via emotions and the simple things in life. his works explore aspects of human relationships and the many unsaid things we forget to celebrate or recognise on a daily basis   says jha. he believes his sense of articulation   be it as a songwriter or as a public figure   makes it space among the masses as a form of a secure narrative  be it in hindi or english.  that s how cultures prosper and such figures become a tool to carry a movement that looks at a cross cultural sentimental connect. this connect has taken joshi all over the world  whether it is winning awards for his ads at cannes or adapting milkha singh s remarkable life for the film with bhaaag milkha bhaag       . mukesh kaushik  deputy editor  dainik bhaskar  who has observed joshi s career over the years  says he knows how to dive down to pluck out hidden desires and touch the raw nerve of the masses.  he has an added advantage of cinematic experiences that give his poetry and his feelings a    mm canvas. his songs laced with patriotism are best suited to the contemporary nationalist environment of our times  which give fertile ground for his work. i think the blood group of his poetry is b   which is always in demand in pro establishment classes. he writes the story of india in polite words  a missing element in his fellow nationalist writers   says kaushik.also read  in his desire to snuff out nehru s legacy  modi to launch his museum of prime ministersindeed  listen to this song from manikarnika  the queen of jhansi  desh se hai pyar toh har pal ye kehna chahiyemain rahoon ya na rahoon bharat ye rehna chahiyesilsila ye baad mere yunhi chalna chahiyemain rahoon ya na rahoon bharat ye rehna chahiye. and compare it to khoon chala from rang de basanti  badan se tapak karzameen se lipat kargaliyon se raston seubhar kar umad karnaye rang bharne kokhoon chala khoon chala. what a difference a decade makes.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




for modi and bjp  remaking indian society is more important than remaking the economy
text size  a  a over the weekend  india s supreme court pronounced on a title dispute in ayodhya  a small town in india s northern state of uttar pradesh. like many other property cases in india  this one had been working its way through the judicial system for decades. but it may be the most consequential such dispute in indian history.millions of hindus believe ayodhya was the capital of ram  an avatar of vishnu and hero of the epic ramayana  and the dispute was over rights to the site where hindus say a   th century mosque was built over ram s birthplace. reversing a lower court s order that the area be divided between the two sides  judges awarded it entirely to the hindu applicants  while saying muslims must be compensated with land elsewhere.the dispute is inextricably entwined with national politics and the status of indian secularism. it exploded into the national consciousness in the     s and early     s  when both the then ruling indian national congress party and today s ruling bharatiya janata party laid claim to ram s heritage. congress prime minister rajiv gandhi had the locks on the mosque broken open and began an election campaign from the town.meanwhile  bjp leaders launched a nationwide  rath yatra    a pilgrimage in a bus decked out to look like a chariot   intending to gather support for replacing the mosque with a hindu temple.  one of the local organizers of the rath yatra was a young man named narendra modi.  finally  amid the escalating tensions  a mob of hindu activists physically demolished the medieval mosque in      as the state police   controlled by the local bjp administration   stood by or ran away. that defiant act of violence marked the beginning of the long rise of the bjp to absolute power in india.today  after the supreme court awarded the bjp run central government the right to set up a trust to administer the process of hindu worship at this long disputed site  it is worth noting how effectively and efficiently modi s party has moved forward on the core aspects of its ideological agenda. for decades  the hindu nationalist wing of indian politics has mobilized around certain key issues  the banning of cow slaughter  the building of a temple at ayodhya  combating the perceived demographic threat to hindus from migration or conversion  and denying autonomy to india s muslim majority state of jammu and kashmir.on each of these  in just the few months since modi was reelected as prime minister with an enhanced majority earlier this year  there has been significant progress. a temple will be built at ayodhya  kashmir has had its special status revoked  a project to disenfranchise all  foreigners  in the border state of assam has been concluded and may be extended to the rest of india. a national law effectively banning religious conversion may not be far off  while violence from self styled  cow protectors  has also been widely publicized.the speed and energy with which the bjp s social agenda has been implemented stands in sharp contrast to the dilatory and timid approach the government has taken to structural economic reform. when modi was first elected in       many hoped that he would instead focus on the economy over social issues  as the bjp had done during its previous stint in power in new delhi  remember the slogan   build toilets before temples   .but the modi government has clearly prioritized foreign affairs and domestic social change. while some major reforms have been introduced  including a new bankruptcy code and a nationwide goods and services tax  other long pending measures that would improve indian competitiveness have been postponed or avoided. loss making or unproductive state owned companies have not been shut down or sold  for fear of the political fallout. this reluctance to reform has persisted in spite of a dramatic and self inflicted economic slowdown  reflected last week in moody s decision to downgrade the outlook for india to negative.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe question is what modi chooses to do after this victory. with so much progress to tout on the hindu nationalist agenda  will he now feel he has the political space for bold economic reform  this is what many of those who continue to be optimistic about his tenure argue. and modi himself continues to frame the government s social program carefully  as part of the natural and impartial settling of long pending issues rather than as the beginning of a new radical agenda.but such hopes have been continually raised since      and mostly been disappointed. the only rational conclusion is that modi and his party feel that remaking indian society is more important than remaking the economy. perhaps they have been elected more on the basis of the social issues the bjp has espoused since its founding decades ago than on nebulous hopes of economic progress. or perhaps they re just true believers themselves.  bloombergalso read  ram mandir s done  now modi can t ride more hindu nationalism as economy is stallingsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




can ayodhya ram mandir work for bjp in states when pm modi didn t 
text size  a  a a day before the supreme court verdict on the ayodhya title suit  a senior minister in the narendra modi led government thought of generating some feel good stories about the state of the indian economy. she called a group of journalists to give them a lowdown on how the worst was over and an uptick in the economy would be visible from the third quarter as the slump had  bottomed out . achhe din aane hi wale hain  good days are about to come  was the central message  no matter what moody s had to say. if it  slump  has bottomed out  when will the numbers start showing it  revival    asked an intrepid journalist. the minister looked flustered. she wouldn t commit a timeline. some sectors have bottomed out but others may take time because of the  lag  in the economy  she said.the minister may need to have a convincing answer for her bosses in the government and the ruling party though. after peaking in the      lok sabha elections  the bjp seems to be getting caught in this lag now. the haryana and maharashtra assembly election results were indicative of it.also read  ram mandir s done  now modi can t ride more hindu nationalism as economy is stallingtough times ahead for bjpa party that used to ride roughshod over everyone and everything that came in its way is looking like a hapless victim in maharashtra today as shiv sena chief uddhav thackeray suddenly roars like a  tiger  that his father  bal thackeray  was once known as.in haryana  the bjp is compelled to share power with dushyant chautala s jannayak janta party  jjp   primarily a jat party that is antithetical to its non jat politics. chautala now wants a common minimum programme  and not the bjp manifesto  to set the government s agenda.the bjp s coalition partner in bihar  nitish kumar s jd u   wants to join the nda government on the condition of proportional representation. this means up to four ministerial berths for the jd u  that has    members in the   th lok sabha.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowkumar is likely to grow more assertive in the run up to the bihar assembly elections next year. the bjp is not in a position to say  no  to him  the prospect of a      type opposition mahagathbandhan is too daunting.worse  jharkhand and delhi are going to the polls before bihar  and the bjp is not seen as a favourite in these two states. the party may not be very excited about      either. of one union territory and the four states going to the polls that year   puducherry  tamil nadu  kerala  west bengal and assam   only the last offers any comfort at this stage.also read  sc ayodhya verdict shows muslims can be given public space if it doesn t adulterate hindu onebjp s desperationclearly  it s not just the economy that is witnessing a lag  as the minister mentioned.maharashtra and haryana have signalled the onset of a likely lag the bjp is staring at in its political fortune. but will the supreme court verdict paving the way for the construction of the ram mandir in ayodhya reverse it the bjp was quick to take credit for the resolution of the ayodhya issue  with working president j.p. nadda pointing out that the judgment came during the narendra modi led nda government s tenure.the bjp s desperation is understandable. the so called  formidable organisation machinery  that bjp president amit shah was credited for building seems to become ineffective whenever the  modi factor  is out of the equation. the much hyped booth level workers  panna pramukhs  and lakhs of people who joined the bjp during its membership drives were difficult to trace in haryana and maharashtra. political  masterstrokes  such as the installation of chief ministers from non dominant communities   non jat in haryana and non maratha in maharashtra   came to naught.modi as the prime ministerial candidate could transcend the caste barriers  but the bjp as a political party hasn t. so long as people voted for modi in the lok sabha and state assembly elections from      to       traditional caste fault lines looked blurry.the same looks unbridgeable when they vote to elect their chief minister. the bjp suddenly looks fallible and vulnerable  at least in the assembly elections. people still trust modi but they have started asking questions.also read  two readings of ayodhya verdict  legalising hindutva or separating site from structurebjp banks on ram mandir s electoral appealand that s why the ayodhya verdict is so crucial in the bjp s scheme of things. of the three core agendas   uniform civil code  scrapping of article     and ram mandir in ayodhya   modi shah led bjp has delivered them all. well  almost. consider the triple talaq legislation as a substitute for the ucc  which the party is no longer enthusiastic about. article     might not have fired the imagination of the people   probably because of the overdose of nationalism since the       surgical strikes . but the ram mandir in ayodhya must  or so the bjp hopes.during a video chat with bjp workers from varanasi last month  a party member had urged modi      not to apply the cut off age  of    years to be in the government  in his own case. the prime minister just smiled in response. he couldn t comment. the bjp remains vulnerable without him.as i suggested in my column last week  the first indication of how ayodhya s ram mandir issue will play out in national politics is likely to come on    december when jharkhand assembly election results are out.don t go by the no one s victory or loss in ayodhya speeches or those reports about pm modi telling his ministers not to make  unnecessary  remarks on this issue.there were similar reports after the       surgical strikes   the      balakot strike and the defanging of article     too. they soon became the bjp s central election planks. so  trust the ruling party to project ayodhya verdict as a major achievement of its government in jharkhand elections.will it work  we will know on    december. but going by the tepid response of the people in haryana and maharashtra to the move on article      the bjp may devise a new strategy to make the ayodhya verdict an election game changer.a senior politician recently told me in exasperation   voters keep shifting the goalpost  nowadays. you give them roti  they want vegetables and pulses. you give them roti and vegetables  they want mutton and chicken. there is no end to their expectations . true  but who is to blame for this we will come to this discussion some other time.i recalled my conversation with the politician as political observers are wondering whether the people who have been voting for the bjp for decades on its ayodhya ram mandir assurance would now shift the goal post and want more or vote for the party again for delivering on its promise.can ayodhya s ram mandir swing it again for the bjp in a country where    per cent of the population is below    years  most of them were not even born when l.k. advani started his ram rath yatra in      and created a frenzy that led to the demolition of the babri masjid two years later.if the bjp wants to overcome the likely lag in its political fortune  it must convince the people that the ram mandir is an answer to all their quests   spiritual as well as temporal.meanwhile  the wizards in the finance ministry also seem to be waiting for some divine intervention  a deus ex machina  to end the  lag  in the economy.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




ram mandir s done  now modi can t ride more hindu nationalism as economy is stalling
text size  a  a even the most incorrigible critics of prime minister narendra modi would struggle to find fault with his short and sweet address to the nation after the ayodhya judgment.it had three strands. one  that the supreme court had settled a festering  divisive issue and now it was time to move on  forgetting the  fear  bitterness and negativity  of the past.second  that the date    november  was particularly significant  as it was the anniversary    th  actually  of the fall of the berlin wall that divided the world during the cold war. he invoked this berlin wall comparison not necessarily for ayodhya  but the opening of the kartarpur sahib corridor  where he acknowledged that both india and pakistan had worked together  forgetting their differences.and third  he said  the supreme court had already ordered that the ram temple could be built. it was therefore an obligation on the part of all citizens to dedicate themselves to the larger task of nation building. he invoked  unity in diversity  repeatedly  vividhta mein ekta   and concluded with greetings for eid e milad.so far  so good. then  we move to the political meaning of what he said. his third point   temple done  now is the time for nation building   is what indicates the next steps in his government and party s politics. also  some important questions.he swept the      election with a combination of welfarism turbo charged by hindu nationalism. with article     and the ram mandir done  and some moves towards a uniform civil code  banning triple talaq  made  what is left of that agenda  within less than six months of beginning its second term  the modi government and the bjp have done almost everything they have been promising on their hindu and nationalist agenda for decades. where do they go next modi won      on the promise of  achhe din   minimum government maximum governance  growth and jobs. most of that hasn t happened. if anything  the economic and employment situation has greatly deteriorated in the past three years. in       hindu nationalism plus direct benefit transfers to crores of poor enabled him to persuade enough voters to look beyond the economic distress to win a second mandate. what does he do next we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin a more perfect world  his government would need to normalise and relax restrictions in kashmir  at some point de escalate with pakistan and there isn t another foreign adversary to get people angry with. some bit of economic nationalism  possibly directed at chinese imports  could be useful. but it can t have anywhere near the same oomph as demolishing a mosque  building a temple  bombing balakot  surgical strikes and so on.modi has employed his foreign visits and interactions brilliantly to enhance his political stature and convince his voters that he s seen by global leaders in a league several notches above any other indian leader they can remember. he is too smart not to know that this would be unsustainable unless india s economy breaks out of a stall that s looking chronic now.therefore    november       is also significant for our domestic politics. because this is when voters would expect modi to focus back on their economic well being  redeem his old pledge of  achhe din .of course  if you do not have grand new ideas or imagination to break out of the slide  you could explore more options to fire emotional populism  the other religious sites  nrc  and pakistan is always next door. but  as the disappointments of maharashtra and even haryana show  voters are a bit bored with the same hindu nationalist potion now. the bjp performed way below expectations in both states  although the vote took place within    weeks of the action on article    .you can take an optimistic view and presume that modi and his party will now focus on the economy. but then  there is the jharkhand election next month  delhi soon thereafter  and so on. and this isn t a political leadership that takes even a panchayat election lightly.also read  two readings of ayodhya verdict  legalising hindutva or separating site from structuresubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india cannot be a    trillion economy if modi govt gives in to protectionist lobbies
text size  a  a there is simply no way to get away from the fact that the clouds over the economy continue to darken   not just because of events already unfolding but equally because of the quality of the government response. moody s decision to put out a warning on its india rating may be nothing more than recognising the changes in economic prospects that have already occurred  since rating agencies typically react slowly and tend to be behind the curve.what should worry forecasters  and everyone else  is the risk that the minor upswing in economic growth that most of them expect in the quarters following july september  even if only helped by progressive changes in the base period comparator  may in fact not come about because of a downswing that feeds on itself for a variety of reasons.there is a fiscal crisis building up  which might become apparent when the finance commission presents its report   especially if it seeks to claw back the tax share of the states by putting out the data on the central government s vast unpaid bills  hidden expenditures  revenue shortfalls  and much else. the government is spending on citizen friendly programmes to win votes  and who is to complain  but where are the steps to bring in the money to pay for the goodies at the same time  capital is being used badly or destroyed. the financial sector is one sink. the public sector swallows up ever more cash   the latest pile going to two bankrupt phone companies which are unable to pay salaries. the railways has taken in huge cash  but has little to show so far by way of growth in traffic and revenue. the bankruptcy process is taking its own toll. irresponsible chief ministers cancelling energy contracts destroy capital too. regulators who mismanage sectors  as in telecom  have destroyed capital wholesale   and the supreme court has not helped. what underpins the economy s growth potential are the still high savings and investment rates  but these have little meaning if the money that is invested disappears without a trace down various sinkholes   among which one is real estate.also read  private banks are also in trouble  modi govt must act now to set up resolution capabilitythe big worry is continuing denial by those in charge  perhaps even a lack of comprehension. the decision to opt out of the big regional trade agreement may eventually have been out of lack of choice  but it is silly to pretend that it is a sign of bold leadership. when every country east of dhaka is willing to sign up and india is not  it says something is wrong with india. this reflects a failure of leadership over the past five years  and a failure to reform and get ready for opening up to and integrating with the largest  fastest growing region in the world.the argument that past free trade agreements have not worked in india s favour is false  they made little difference. the fear of chinese products swamping the market may or may not be real  but the trade deficit with china is only half the regional story  india has a big trade deficit with virtually every country in the region. the bilateral deals talked about as an alternative are non starters. opening up to australia means opening up to agriculture  with new zealand  dairying  and with asean countries  on other agricultural items. as for switching from  acting east  to looking west  trade deals with the us will be no easier  even as the country loses trade disputes at the world trade organization.it is claimed that we can join later  but when the domestic lobbies that have won are the protectionists  why should they give up their hold on government policymakers  where are the action plans and timelines to get ready for slashing tariffs  doubling agricultural productivity  and ending cross subsidies in power pricing so that industry is not penalised  or to get into regional supply chains when organised retailers are discouraged  the government has raised tariffs and become an anti dumping champion  so the country is becoming more inward looking. how then can the system open up  or become more competitive  those that are competitive are being locked out of markets by those that are not. the losers are winning. this is no way to get to    trillion.also read  regulating amazon  flipkart is a shock indian economy can t afford nowsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




history is offering two closures  kartarpur   ayodhya. and modi has a starring role in both
text size  a  a for the best part of       despite pulwama  balakot and the kashmir crisis  the idea of the kartarpur sahib gurdwara corridor between the two punjabs stayed alive. prime minister narendra modi reinforced the end of conversation with pakistan after the pulwama attack  diplomats between the two countries faced off several times  including at the un  on the removal of article      which gave special status to kashmir. islamabad even expelled indian high commissioner ajay bisaria.but the idea of crossing the border to pay obeisance at the shrine of the first sikh guru  guru nanak  could not be denied.this week  in fact  history is offering not one  but two opportunities for closure  and in both  pm modi is playing a starring role. after all  modi understands the power of religious sentiments   whether of sikhs in kartarpur or hindus in ayodhya.the first opportunity is a small step in healing the distance between the two punjabs  via the journey to kartarpur sahib.the second is the supreme court verdict on the ram janmabhoomi babri masjid title dispute on the other side of the gangetic plains   the pm has already cautioned people to accept the verdict in all humility and advised his council of ministers not to make unnecessary comments that could hurt peace.also read  pakistan sends feelers  wants to restore diplomatic ties with india after kartarpur eventkartarpur sahib corridoron kartarpur sahib  modi has sensed the strength of the sikh sentiment. in bangkok last week  where he spoke to the indian thai community  of which a large number are namdhari sikhs  on the margins of the asean summit  the pm invited them to come to india and travel across the kartarpur corridor.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowperhaps  despite his misgivings  modi has little option but to own the project. some of this is political   punjab is run by that rare political being  a congress chief minister  and modi realises that his support of the sikhs in this deeply emotional moment may endow the bjp and its ally  the akali dal  with some goodwill  which could even translate into votes.certainly  the kartarpur sahib corridor is much more than short term politics. modi realises this is truly a historic moment. this is the first time since partition of india in      that the border between the two punjabs  apart from the crossing at wagah attari  is being breached in peacetime.so  the pm will now travel saturday to sultanpur lodhi in punjab  where the historic ber sahib gurudwara is located  on his way to dera baba nanak  the last village near the india pakistan border. here  a passenger terminal has been built to facilitate pilgrims  which he will inaugurate.the kartarpur sahib gurdwara lies about   km away on the other side  across the ravi. on a good day  you can hear the  gurbani  as dusk falls  and the breeze from west to east carries the sound across.modi won t cross the border  unlike his predecessor in the bjp  atal bihari vajpayee  did    years ago  in       when he went to lahore and laid the foundation stone of good neighbourliness. it is certainly too soon for modi to accept reconciliation with pakistan s  hybrid  government  where the real power lies with the army and prime minister imran khan is more or less a  mukhauta   a mask.but by giving in to a truly punjab punjab moment  modi is  albeit reluctantly  accepting that there are some things even he can t deny. punjab s recent history has been written in blood  with lakhs suffering from the most brutal killing and violence imaginable  and another  .  crore forcibly uprooted from their homes on both sides.also read  how kartarpur corridor talks went on despite india pakistan tension  diplomatic roadblocksayodhya verdictas for ayodhya  modi realises he cannot allow history to repeat itself when the verdict in the ramjanmabhoomi babri masjid title dispute is delivered in less than a week from now. he knows that rss affiliates like the vishwa hindu parishad were banned for its role in the destruction of the masjid in       and that top bjp leaders such as l.k. advani  murli manohar joshi and uma bharati were charged with criminal conspiracy by a special cbi court.as prime minister  modi s reputation as a global leader is at stake. the wave of communal rioting that followed in          with riots spreading to mumbai  delhi  kanpur  surat among others  and in which nearly       people are estimated to have been killed  simply cannot be allowed again.that s why rss leaders are reaching out to muslim organisations as well as civil society. flag marches are taking place in ayodhya and several other sensitive spots. if india emerges unscathed  modi s reputation will be consolidated.from kartarpur sahib to ayodhya  this is certainly an important week for the pm.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




you can t coerce india to adopt digital payments. here s what modi govt should try instead
text size  a  a for years  the narendra modi government has made the promotion of digital payments a priority. in its latest move  the government last month amended the income tax act       and the payment and settlement systems act       doing away with the merchant discount rate   charges levied on digital payments.so far  the modi government s strategy to promote electronic payments has been a mix of coercion  persuasion  and incentives. this latest move is mostly coercive.the modi government plans to prescribe specific modes of digital payments  which  under the income tax act  will have to be provided by every business outlet with a turnover of more than rs    crore. going by finance minister nirmala sitharaman s budget      speech  these may include bhim upi  upi qr code  aadhaar pay  certain debit cards  neft  and rtgs. there will be a penalty of rs       for each day of non compliance  to be enforced by the joint commissioner of income tax.moreover  payment service providers will have to offer the instruments prescribed above free of cost  with the reserve bank of india and banks mandated to absorb the cost of transactions. this amendment to the payment and settlement systems act was done through the finance bill  which was a money bill. the amendment does not seem to pertain to the matters listed in article     of the constitution  which defines the scope of money bills.also read  paytm  phonepe  amazon  google help push upi payments past   billion transactionsmdr  the main source of incomein a market with competing instruments  the modi government is forcing businesses to offer the instruments it prefers  while prohibiting payment service providers from charging for these instruments. going by the past experience of subsidy on debit upi transactions  the promise that the rbi and banks will absorb the costs will at best mean that only a nominal reimbursement will be made.the main source of income that oils the machinery of digital payments  from the issuance of cards to the point of sale infrastructure for accepting payments  is the merchant discount rate  mdr . this is the charge levied on each electronic payment  which is usually absorbed by the merchants  albeit ultimately in any business the incidence of all charges is on the consumers.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmdr is regulated. a lower mdr is mandated for debit card transactions. mdr is  .  per cent on debit cards and  .   .  per cent on credit cards.a debit card  a upi or an aadhaar enabled transaction up to rs       has been made free since january       with the modi government agreeing to reimburse  .  per cent of the transaction amount to the banks  which will then reimburse that amount to the payment service providers  for a period of two years.also read  india has a long way to go to squeeze cash out of the economy   become digitalfive forms of disruptionthe government s decision to prohibit the pricing of its preferred instruments takes this price regulation too far. it is likely to have a disruptive effect on the entire payments sector.first  all payment instruments will be affected by the decision to remove mdr. it will be difficult to offer other instruments because they will be competing with instruments that are free. this is essentially government mandated predatory pricing.second  the incentive of payment service providers to focus on the quality of services will weaken considerably. the service providers must have the incentive to respond to the needs of consumers. the payments business appears to be a simple utilities business  but it is not. even though digital payment is only a transfer of money from one account to another  there is a lot that goes into the process before and after that transfer happens. the payment service providers create awareness among consumers and solve problems for them. in india  there is still a long way to go before people become comfortable using electronic payments.third  the decision will weaken the incentive to expand the payment infrastructure to more merchant locations. while the larger establishments will offer electronic payments  the payment service providers will have little incentive to go beyond those establishments. mdr pays for the costs of convincing  training  equipping  and assisting merchants to accept digital payments. a key challenge in increasing the adoption of digital payments is merchant acquisition.fourth  this move will force bundling of payment services with other services  because only those firms that provide payment services in addition to other services will be able to offer it. these may include banks  retail chains  telecom companies  etc. in recent years  we have seen some unbundling of payment services  with the emergence of more standalone payment service providers. such firms will struggle to survive because their business model rests on the ability to charge for payment services.fifth  the decision weakens the incentive to invest in innovation in the digital payments industry. investors usually take risks with the objective of making money. an easy way to kill innovation in any sector is to prohibit the firms from charging for their services.also read  banks better watch out  the fintech payment revolution is comingneed for fintechin the government  it is a strangely persistent belief that the use of such coercion is a good way of achieving inclusion. rarely does the government allow the markets to find ways to reach the consumers through competition and innovation. when it does  the results are usually good.mobile telephony is an example. over the last twenty years  competition and innovation have brought down the price of mobile services by more than    per cent. competition has forced firms to pursue scale and efficiency enhancing innovation  and so prices have gradually fallen. imagine if  in       the government had forced the mobile companies to price the calls at a low rate to  promote mobile telephony . the business model would have become non viable. firms might have survived by servicing the densely populated areas  but they would not have been able to invest in new technologies and in deepening the market.the advent of fintech  financial technologies  can disrupt old business models by creating new ways of designing and providing financial services. given the rapid adoption of technology in india  we have an opportunity to leapfrog in the usage of financial services by deploying fintech.however  this will require a conducive policy environment. those who invested in or built standalone payment firms in recent years might be regretting their decision because this sudden move of the modi government to remove mdr has harmed their business model. we in india are quite used to such arbitrary interventions in the economy. the statist mindset of command and control that gives rise to such decisions is not going away any time soon. this raises the question  can fintech really thrive in such a policy environment this article is part of a series examining the future of data in partnership with carnegie india leading up to its global technology summit      in bengaluru from     december     . more details about the summit are available here.the author is a fellow at carnegie india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




how modi govt resolves naga issue will have a lesson on handling kashmir  manipur
text size  a  a in the northeast  there is finally hope in the air. india s longest insurgency is heading towards closure after six decades. the final naga accord missed its    october deadline  but there are enough indications that the contentious issue of the nscn i m  version of a confederal union with  shared sovereignty  between india and the naga  nation  with a separate flag and constitution has been subsumed by a focus on cultural identity with constitutional guarantees.the armed separatist group national socialist council of nagaland  isak muivah  or nscn  i m   the key stakeholder in the talks with narendra modi government  is back on board  and is now likely to strive to negotiate the best deal under the indian constitution.how we address the naga issue will have many lessons for policymakers and security experts on how to go about addressing the complex issues in kashmir and manipur.also read   those days are gone   how naga people see peace accord interlocutor s talks with nscn immerits of democracythe first agreement between the indian government with moderate naga groups in      saw the creation of a union territory  which after subsequent negotiations became a state in     . article    a was enacted in the indian constitution to preserve naga identity and culture.  notwithstanding anything in this constitution  no act of parliament in respect of religious or social practices of the nagas  naga customary law and procedure  administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to naga customary law  ownership and transfer of land and its resources  shall apply to the state of nagaland unless the legislative assembly of nagaland by a resolution so decides   it said.in my view  article    a motivated the naga people to accept the merits of indian democracy. now  its modified avatar with additional concessions or safeguards will be key to the final naga accord.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  naga accord misses deadline  but nscn  i m  is back on boarddemand for independencethe numerous naga tribes with their diverse set of languages and cultures are spread across arunachal pradesh  nagaland  manipur and myanmar  but there is one thing that unites all of them   the desire to preserve culture and ethnicity. that was the root cause of the naga insurgency.the naga tribes had enjoyed quasi independence under the british rule since the     s. their demand for independence started in this period.once the british left  the naga nation wanted to transition from being a  nation  to being a  sovereign state . this led them to seek independence from india  which led to a classic full fledged insurgency in the forested hilly terrain conducive for guerrilla warfare. the naga nationalist council  nnc  formed under a.z. phizo in      provided political and military leadership. external support was available in later years from china and east pakistan.but an inexperienced indian state blundered into battle  treating it as a law and order problem requiring a military solution.killing of dr haraluthe brutal killing of haralu  the region s first doctor  in an encounter by a   sikh patrol on   july      on the outskirts of kohima  was a turning point for both the insurgents and the indian army. the  murder  of the most respected naga senior citizen hit national and international headlines  and made even moderates join the underground movement.the indian state also learnt its lessons. it evolved a unique strategy based on people friendly military operations  winning the hearts and minds of the people through development  persuasion  dialogue and constitutional concessions guarantees to seek a political solution.the first phase of the insurgency ended in      with the shillong accord being signed with the nnc  which accepted the indian constitution and agreed to give up arms.but it also resulted in the creation of national socialist council of nagaland  nscn   which refused to accept the agreement and broke away from the nnc. they felt that the naga cause   creation of nagalim as an independent state with a flag and constitution and only a quasi confederal relationship with india   had been compromised.also read  while kashmir continues to grab headlines  we must not ignore the growing anxiety in nagalanda two decade negotiationwith time  insurgents were worn down by relentless operations by the indian army including many transborder operations with myanmar.people began to enjoy the fruits of democracy too. development and education opened up new opportunities.doors for negotiations were kept open and a ceasefire agreement was signed with nscn i m  on   august     . since then  insurgent activities have been sporadic at a relatively lower scale. the bigger problem was that being part of the underground had become a way of life for the jobless youth. this underground movement sustained itself by running a parallel government and large scale extortion and tax collection.meanwhile  the negotiations with the indian state dragged on for two decades with the nscn i m  insisting on a confederal relationship with new delhi  with a flag and constitution of its own.also read  nagas are worried a peace accord without nscn  i m  won t bring real peacea winning strategythe narendra modi government having made political inroads into the northeast  pursued the negotiation more vigorously and signed the naga framework accord on   august       and is now on the cusp of clinching the final agreement.after scrapping of article     in jammu and kashmir  the nscn  i m  became increasingly suspicious and hardened its stand on nagalim  constitution and flag  and even threatened to walk out of negotiations.the narendra modi government responded by roping in six other armed naga outfits under the banner of naga national political groups and some civil society groups for the negotiations. home minister amit shah also gave assurances about the sanctity of article    a  unlike the  impermanent  article    .details of the final agreement are not yet clear. but as per my assessment  the nagalim demand has given way to the cultural integration of the naga people with a pan naga cultural assembly and autonomous councils for naga predominant areas in manipur and arunachal pradesh. the naga flag may be used at cultural events. possibly  a modified article    a with specific cultural provisions and more concrete guarantees to avoid circumvention of legislative assembly through governor s rule may have been agreed to.the moral of the naga story is that the strategy evolved by the indian state to tackle insurgencies requires patience and perseverance to find a political solution  and must never be abandoned. the naga people moved on through political and economic empowerment. the underground movement was caught in a time warp and no longer represented the will of the people. hopefully  the agreement will put an end to lawlessness perpetrated by the insurgent cadres.it is time to replicate this strategy in manipur  the red corridor  and above all  in kashmir.lt gen h s panag pvsm  avsm  r  served in the indian army for    years. he was goc in c northern command and central command. post retirement  he was member of armed forces tribunal. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




forget modi s  justice for all  mission  indian judiciary must do justice to its data first
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi had in      asked law universities to conduct research on lok adalats and come up with suggestions to fulfill the government s mission of  sabka nyay    justice for all. but a research project analysing the functioning of lok adalats in four states   odisha  west bengal  bihar  and jharkhand   shows why instituting any judicial reform in india will remain a challenge.it s because of the abysmal quality of judicial data available in india.this is a generally accepted fact within india s research community. the law commission of india  while dealing with the issue of pendency of cases  has also commented on the need to institute better data collection and data management methods. the problem is two folds. first  the quantum and range of data that judicial institutions provide are limited. second  even when the data is available  its structure and form are unfriendly and often full of errors and inconsistencies. both these problems are glaringly visible in relation to lok adalat data in the four eastern states.incomplete pictureit is always essential to look at the story behind the numbers  which is often more nuanced. it is not enough to report that a certain number of cases have been disposed of through lok adalats  it is also important to go beyond the gross number. what is the distribution of disposal across different categories of cases  how many cases were in the pre litigation and post litigation stages  what is the proportion of disposal from each district in a state  what is the pattern of disposal across a year   are the numbers because of singular efforts on designated occasions or are they the product of a more organic endeavour such an analysis reveals more about the structural adjustments  which might be necessary. unfortunately  the data management practices in our judicial institutions hamper such analysis. in these four states  a scrutiny of the lok adalat disposal records of three years    july      to    july       is representative of the larger reality concerning judicial data in india.also read  judges in india s high courts waste precious time heading committees on furnishings  carsslsas don t have dataas nodal administrators of lok adalats at the state level  state legal services authorities  slsa  are expected to possess all relevant data and documents. none of the slsas in all four states were in a position to share monthly or annual district wise disposal records.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmost slsas  odisha  west bengal  bihar  were not able to share the number of lok adalats that were organised at various levels  state  district  taluk  in the three year period in question. for west bengal  the data only mentioned the total number of lok adalats without specifying the number at each level.only the slsas in odisha and jharkhand were able to give separate numbers for pre litigation and post litigation cases. slsas in odisha and jharkhand were also the only ones which separated disposals through national lok adalats  nlas  from disposals through state level  district level  and taluk level lok adalats. nlas are organised by the national legal services authorities and the state level authorities are involved in its implementation but not in setting the agenda.for bihar  data was not available even about the different categories of cases  bank recovery  revenue matters  cheque bounce matters  etc. .also read  judge vacancies at high courts hit      high       posts need to be filledmissing out on crucial insightwhen a case is pending in a court  it can be referred for disposal through lok adalats in three ways. first  both parties agree for the matter to be referred to a lok adalat. second  one party submits an application and the court  upon being satisfied that there are chances of settlement  refers the matter. third  the court refers it if it is sure a lok adalat can take cognizance of the matter.data on the manner in which the case has been referred to the lok adalat can be extremely useful. it can provide insight into the type of cases where people are voluntarily opting for lok adalats. it can improve our understanding of litigant behaviour and assist in developing strategies to popularise lok adalats among the target groups. it can help us analyse the type of cases where judges are exercising their discretion to refer matters to lok adalats. this  in turn  can facilitate development of appropriate norms and guidelines for the exercise of such discretion in different kinds of cases. unfortunately  there is absolutely no data available on this. most likely  to the leadership in the judiciary  this has not appeared as data even worth collecting.also read  the indian footballer behind a kannada graphic novel spreading legal awarenessway out for indian judiciaryit would be easy but wrong to merely blame the slsas and other legal services authorities for this sorry state of affairs. more often than not  they are understaffed  overworked  and do not have access to sufficient technical tools.officers also lack adequate technical training to properly supervise data collection and data maintenance practices. judges as such are not used to research at a systemic level and thus are not always best placed to design a meaningful data matrix. most importantly  they are part of a system that does not value data  at least not in an adequately refined sense.the most obvious symptom of this disregard for data is reflected in the continued insistence that increasing the number of judges would solve the issue of pendency even though such an understanding is not based on any proper empirical enquiry. instead of filling up vacancies  which would address the issue of pendency much more definitively  we end up increasing the number of judges in the supreme court.sooner or later  the indian judiciary will need to walk out of the middle ages and commit itself to becoming a democratic institution of the   st century. that is not going to happen when we are stuck with data that is archaic in its structure and shallow in its contents.the author is fulbright post doctoral research scholar  harvard law school. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




trump and xi watching  modi knows india needs reforms even if it pulled out of rcep
text size  a  a hours before india refused to join the china led    nation regional comprehensive economic partnership or rcep monday  the us unveiled an updated status report on  a free and open indo pacific  or foip in which it applauded its strategic partnership with india   a fellow democracy with  .  billion people .in contrast  us secretary of state mike pompeo who signed off on the report  accused china of  practicing repression at home and abroad   and described it as being intolerant of dissent and aggressively controlling media and civil society.significantly  as they sought to grow their respective trade groupings  both china and the us had the same countries in their line of sight   the    asean nations  australia  new zealand  korea  japan and india.except for india  though  the remaining    out of the    countries across the indo pacific decided they would join the rcep as well as ally with the foip.prime minister narendra modi cited mahatma gandhi s talisman  besides his own misgivings  as his reason for saying  no  to the rcep. but there seems to be something else happening here that doesn t quite square up.also read  modi s rcep move shows sound political judgement. don t scoff  it s rare these daysmore than gandhi s talismantwo weeks ago  finance minister nirmala sitharaman said a us india trade deal was going swimmingly well. while in mumbai over the weekend  us treasury secretary steve mnuchin told key industrialists including anand mahindra  adi godrej and harsh goenka that the us wanted india to become  not a    trillion economy as modi has often talked about  but a     trillion one.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nownone other than the chinese communist party owned global times seems to have understood what was being said.in an editorial tuesday  it said   washington wants to mobilise new delhi and turn it into a  frontline  in the confrontation against china. global times went on to pay modi a compliment.  but india seems to be craftier than the us. it is enjoying diplomatic benefits provided by the us  while attaching importance on developing relations with china. washington is driving a wedge between china and india  but modi won t fall into the trap   it said.certainly  opinion is divided on india s decision not to join the rcep. depending on where you stand  the modi government has either capitulated to its own fears of the big  bad and grey nightmare called china  or has stood tall and upright  promising to protect its people in the face of beijing s relentless determination to flood the country with cheap exports.with the economy in such bad shape and growth stagnating at   per cent  perhaps the decision for modi was easier than ever. key stakeholders like the dairy and steel industries were dead against the rcep. rss affiliate swadeshi jagaran manch had warned some time ago that foreign imports could not be allowed to devastate local industry   even though  for one short moment in late september when the pm went to the us  sjm s ashwani mahajan met representatives from walmart and amazon  raising hopes of a compromise.also read  india s rejection of rcep trade deal is a sign of weaknessperform or perishit s odd  though  that the ghost of the east india company is rearing its head again. india had buried that particular nervous twitch with the p.v. narasimha rao manmohan singh      reforms  as it dipped into its reserves and opened itself up to the world. to be wealthy is glorious  india said  as it took a leaf out of deng xiaoping s book  and never looked back.in       india pledged nearly    tonnes of gold with the bank of england and the bank of japan to raise      million. today  india s foreign exchange reserves stand at      billion.oddly enough  the fear of the foreigner is back. this is even more confusing because pm modi has travelled far and wide these past five years  meeting both commoner and king  and he realises that competition is the only way to either perform or perish.in the beginning  that was the reasoning behind  make in india   import duties were raised when the first modi government came in  so as to protect manufacturing at home. but demonetisation and a badly implemented gst  which exacerbated the economic  and more recently  the political situation   apparent in the maharashtra and haryana elections   seem to have contributed to modi s loss of nerve.perhaps the americans  furious at the chinese challenge their domination as a superpower  are indicating that they are willing to bail modi out. fact is  the pm has been more than willing to join security related groupings  like the  quad  nations of the indo pacific  consisting of india  us  japan and australia   foreign minister s. jaishankar participated in a quad ministerial meeting in new york in september with some alacrity.certainly  india s refusal to join the rcep is a decisive moment. but whether or not modi turns right towards donald trump and the us  he knows he has to embrace a new generation of reforms.surviving either trump or china s xi jinping certainly won t be easy. if india has to compete with the world again  modi knows he will have to push some bitter medicine down the country s throat  shed a few duties and tariff barriers  and make india leaner and meaner. in some ways       is like     .perhaps  the pm should read robert frost tonight  before i built a wall  i d ask to knowwhat i was walling in or walling outand to whom i was like to give offense. subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi rejecting rcep shows swadeshis and left think alike on trade
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi s decision to walk out of the regional comprehensive economic partnership monday once again proves that when it comes to trade  the extreme right and the extreme left think alike.india s eleventh hour move to say no to the mega trade pact at the third regional comprehensive economic partnership  rcep  summit in bangkok has an eerie resemblance to the extreme left rejecting the creation of the world trade organisation  wto  from the erstwhile general agreement on tariffs and trade  gatt  in     s.the right is doing exactly what the left had done some three decades ago. the left had predicted the crash of the indian economy in the early     s. the lobby and interest groups that are praising the modi government for the  wise move  have little understanding of the fact that trade and foreign policy always go hand in hand.also read  modi s rcep move shows sound political judgement. don t scoff  it s rare these dayswhat history tells usfrom the ancient chinese silk route to the british east india company  history has shown us how enhancing trade ties and making it the pivot of foreign policy have helped countries expand their reach and influence. such countries have developed their domestic economy by pushing growth in the manufacturing sector  which in turn has led to creation of jobs.wto deputy director general and leading international trade lawyer alan wolff writes in  paradigm lost  us trade policy as an instrument of foreign policy    trade was central to the reconstruction of europe under the marshall plan  and as a bulwark against the spread of communism and soviet influence. wolff says that china even used military power to  maintain the silk road for its value for trade .  fair and reciprocal trade  investments  and exchanges of knowledge deepen our alliances and partnerships  which are necessary to succeed in today s competitive geopolitical environment   he argues.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowleft   right protestnot just the left  the rss affiliated organisations too had expressed their discontent over globalisation and foreign direct investment  fdi  in the early     s. the swadeshi jagran manch  sjm   launched in       opposed india s membership to the wto during the narasimha rao government.the swadeshi jagran manch had then feared that such a move would  compromise swadeshi principles of economic self reliance and expose indian industries to unmanageable competition   writes political scientist and professor of political science at university of pennsylvania francine r. frankel in india s political economy          .the left front had vehemently protested against economic policies of rao  who had manmohan singh as the finance minister. it even took out a rally at india gate  notes sanjaya baru in       how p.v. narasimha rao made history.also read  india stayed out of rcep because it couldn t risk another china dominated aseandon t blame tradenearly three decades later  wto has helped shape india s foreign trade policy while bringing competitiveness in its domestic industry. all this  while the farm sector has been shielded from the challenge against food subsidies through legal recourse under wto s dispute settlement body.if growth in india s manufacturing industry and farming sector has stagnated today  it is because successive governments in new delhi have failed to go for bold reforms. trade policy alone can t be held responsible for the current crisis in the indian economy.new delhi s rejection of rcep by invoking gandhi s talisman does nothing  it only exposes some inherent weaknesses in the indian economy.just to quote some basic numbers without going into any hair splitting analysis  industrial growth shrunk  .  per cent in august due to poor performance of the manufacturing  power generation and mining sectors  merchandise exports contracted  .   per cent between april and september while growth in eight core sectors  coal  crude oil  natural gas  refinery products  fertilisers  steel  cement and electricity  contracted  .  per cent in september  the sharpest fall in last    years.needless to say  this has not happened due to trade. in fact  ever since it came to power in may       the modi government has been extremely protectionist  hiking tariffs across all products  which has even irked its favourite ally america.also read  modi s trump like exit from rcep trade deal is a tactical retreat for indiasubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




no njac but modi govt still manages to have a say on judges  appointments  transfers
text size  a  a it all began in early      when the narendra modi government decided  without any reason  to sit on the recommendation of the supreme court of india to transfer three judges. these were the transfers of uttarakhand high court chief justice k.m. joseph to andhra pradesh   telangana high court as chief justice  justice valmiki mehta of the delhi high court to the andhra pradesh and telangana high court  and justice m.r. shah of the gujarat high court to the madhya pradesh high court.while chief justice joseph and justice shah are now judges of the supreme court  justice mehta passed away in march this year.for over a year  at least until justice tirath singh thakur was the chief justice of india  the transfers remained a source of major friction between the higher judiciary and the modi government.for various reasons  none ever put in writing  the modi government wanted the supreme court collegium to rescind the transfer orders.after cji thakur s retirement  the new collegium finally acquiesced and quietly withdrew the recommendations. it has been downhill ever since.also read  supreme court is going back on promise of transparency  building case for modi govt s njacanother justice  another sc failurethe latest example being gujarat high court judge akil abdulhamid kureshi  whose elevation as the chief justice of madhya pradesh high court has been stalled by the modi government for almost a year now.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhile the supreme court collegium had initially recommended justice kureshi s appointment as the chief justice of madhya pradesh high court  it later decided to send him to a much smaller tripura high court after the modi government twice rejected the collegium s earlier recommendation.such abject harassment of a senior judge doesn t bode well for a key characteristic associated with the higher judiciary   independence. this  unfortunately  is the new normal  one where the centre refuses to dispose of what the judiciary  collegium  proposes  and instead  the judiciary disposes what the modi government proposes.former supreme court judge madan b. lokur is right to say that the national judicial appointments commission  njac   which a constitution bench of the supreme court had struck down as being unconstitutional  is back via the back door   with the silent support of the weakened collegium.that the modi government has repeatedly managed to gets its way on judges  appointments and transfers in the higher judiciary is a poor reflection on the judges who sit in the collegium.also read  recusal has become a selective call of morality for supreme court judgeswhy justice kureshi s case is significantthe tussle between the higher judiciary and the centre over judges  appointments is not a new phenomenon. but the manner in which the modi government has tried to capture the narrative over the yet to be cleared appointment of the judge as chief justice is certainly new.what makes it different is also the way the modi government tried to actually deny justice kureshi the post.his appointment  which is just a matter of a few days now  will not be remembered as a great day for our judicial set up  in fact  it will be the day the collegium s independence will lie in tatters  suggesting that the damage to the institution s reputation could well be permanent.but in an age when fresh controversies erupt or are manufactured at the drop of a hat  the manner in which justice kureshi s appointment was  mis handled will also be forgotten soon  overtaken by another case. and  make no mistake  the modi government knows that the collegium  for whatever reason  is not going to push back.that is why justice kureshi s case won t be the last one where we will see the collegium bow down to the arbitrary diktat of the modi government.also read  modi govt red flags j k lawyer who converted to islam but sc ignores   picks her as judgea history of sortswhile the case of justice kureshi has made headlines  it isn t the only one. there are several other instances of the central government successfully stalling or  in cases where the collegium didn t agree with its stand  sitting on recommendations for longer durations.on    october  the supreme court collegium  for the third time  reiterated its recommendation to elevate karnataka judicial officer p. krishna bhat as a judge of the karnataka high court.his appointment has been delayed due to objections  many of them rejected by the modi government after due process  including inquiry  by the collegium. his name was first recommended for elevation in     .another case that merits a mention is that of justice dama seshadri naidu  who  in september       was recommended to be transferred back to his parent high court   andhra pradesh. however  the centre chose not to clear the proposal  following which the collegium  in january this year  modified its recommendation and decided to shift him to the bombay high court.in almost all cases like justices kureshi  naidu and district and sessions judge krishna bhat  the collegium s reputation took a severe hit. there s little to suggest that things will change any time soon.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




if trump wants to win again  he must take a course in modi politics   be an eternal victim
text size  a  a as united states president donald trump stares at an impeachment inquiry just a year before the presidential polls  he can take a few tips from his  howdy   friend on how to conveniently turn any situation from hostile to friendly.prime minister narendra modi is a master of playing victim  projecting everyone as conspiring against him and then using that to garner sympathy and votes. president trump could do well to learn this skill   convince his voters that his  enemies  and opponents are ganging up against a  self made  man who wants to make america great again.in fact  trump isn t the only one who can benefit from modi s political theory. there are many lessons to be learnt from modi s politics  or  moditics    from how to turn criticism to trophies  pretend to be the perpetual  outsider  even when you are as establishment as can be  be the eternal victim  dominate media and mind space by holding high on spectacle but low on substance events  conveniently distract from pain points  master the peculiar combination of being a statesman and a rabble rouser  resort to monologues but make it seem like you are truly a  people s politician   and generally  be able to outsmart rivals.also read  tough message for modi  political winds are shifting  from nationalism to economy  jobseternal victim and outsidermodi may be the pm   for a second straight term no less   after having served as the chief minister of gujarat for over a decade  but he will always remain an  outsider  and a politician everyone seems to be ganging up against.the criticism he received from all fronts after the      gujarat riots when he had just taken over as cm  the denial of us visa and congress president sonia gandhi s scathing  maut ka saudagar   trader of death  attack   all became useful tools for modi to project himself as a victim  someone who was constantly being badgered. he turned every attack about the riots into an attack on gujarati asmita and five crore gujaratis. his rise in politics   from state cm to bjp s most powerful face ever   has been nothing short of spectacular  but he still wants to project himself as wronged.it has always been modi versus the rest. so  any criticism of him became about how a  self made outsider  was being targeted by the  insiders   the privileged  the dynasts. the entire  naamdar  vs  kaamdar   the entitled versus the hard workers  narrative has been very much a part of this strategy. it reached a feverish pitch in the run up to the lok sabha elections when former congress president rahul gandhi s  chowkidar chor hai  jibe at modi over the rafale deal completely backfired after the pm craftily used it as an example of how he  the  outsider   was being viciously targeted. what s more  he even turned it into a jibe at all chowkidars of the country by conducting a video conference with security guards across india.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  donald trump is a globalist  not a nationalistartful communication strategymodi s communication tactics   make for a great chapter for students of  moditics . every small and mundane thing   from yoga day to teachers  day becomes a grand event. the  howdy  modi   spectacle in houston in september this year is a stand out example of how to make a mountain out of a molehill. it is for good reason that l. k. advani called him an efficient event manager.look at the      lok sabha elections  nothing from unemployment to farmer distress to congress  rafale allegations managed to resonate on the ground. modi was projected as the saviour of nation  his weapon   balakot airstrikes  welfare schemes and fight against privileged dynasts.his monthly radio show  mann ki baat  is nothing but a modi monologue  a neatly available platform for him to talk about literally anything under the sun that he wishes to. most of his  interactions  in fact are one sided and well orchestrated. and yet  he is able to project himself as the  people s pm . what helps is the fact that he is constantly seen and heard  in whatever manner  and he is smart enough to involve people in his initiatives   from swachh bharat to beti bachao  beti padhao and most recently  prohibiting single use plastic.also read  modi s fear of narrative is our insurance against his excessesdr jekyll   mr hyde syndromethe dichotomy in his personality   a carefully crafted one   perhaps defines modi s political theory. as the prime minister  he is the statesman  says all the right things  condemns the wrong  maintains a squeaky clean social media image. as modi the bjp leader and the party s chief campaigner  he doesn t shy away from being a rabble rouser.his mantra is  be every bit the  democratic  prime minister from the ramparts of the red fort on independence day  but don t stop short of making overtly communal statements while campaigning. remember his  kabristaan shamshaan  remark in the run up to the uttar pradesh assembly elections  or his bizarre  and frankly unacceptable  theory before the gujarat state elections about his predecessor manmohan singh holding a  secret meeting  with pakistan officials at congress leader mani shankar aiyar s residence.on twitter  he wishes his bitter political rivals on their birthdays and makes it a point to thank them when they wish him. but while campaigning  he is crass enough to say  doob maro  to them.modi could teach his political theory to world leaders. and as he battles a crisis  trump can just dial modi  say howdy  and take notes.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in modi shah era  the original heroes of ayodhya have been sent on vanvaas
text size  a  a the bharatiya janata party s success is a case study to understand how a political party  formed by a m lange of parties  guided by the ideology of the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rose from two seats in      to     seats in      lok sabha. the party has come a long way. but where are those who picked up the banner of hindutva in the     s and    s the ram janmabhoomi movement was a stepping stone for the bjp. it gave it a pedestal that india s grand old party   the congress   couldn t even fathom. and the credit for that goes entirely to the original hindutvawadis  who somehow are absent from the bjp s current powerful front row. this  at a time when they should ve held some of the most influential positions in the narendra modi government.as india awaits the supreme court verdict on ayodhya this month  many are already preparing for the moment when the construction of a grand ram mandir will begin. uttar pradesh chief minister adityanath has already been setting the stage with his diwali diya celebrations in the temple town. but in all this breathless anticipation  where are the pioneers of the ram janmabhoomi movement  as modi amit shah move on to a hindutva on steroids state today  where are the proto hindutvawadis also read  this is why modi  amit shah and bjp aren t losing sleep over ayodhya verdictuma bharti goes  deaf take  for example  uma bharti. known to be a key figure in the demolition of the babri masjid in      along with murli manohar joshi and lal krishna advani  uma bharti has gone on record to say this about being part of the mob   why should i regret it  i was involved in the ayodhya incident. i remain unrepentant. now  with a decision in the ram janmabhoomi title suit nearing  you hardly see her or any of her colleagues from      basking in the glory of what they originally kickstarted. it is the current lot of bjp front benchers who are riding the wave. a name to reckon with  uma bharti who held key portfolios during the atal bihari vajpayee government   such as human resource development ministry  tourism  youth affairs and sports  and coal   was given drinking water and sanitation ministry in      after her  non performance  in the water resources  river development and ganga rejuvenation ministry by the narendra modi government.when asked about her new portfolio after she gave the swearing in ceremony a miss  she said   i have gone deaf. ask party chief amit shah. only he can answer this.  she has now been made a national vice president of the bjp along with a dozen other ministers.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmargdarshak advani and joshimurli manohar joshi and l.k. advani have been dealt the worse hand. unceremoniously relegated to the  margdarshak mandal  or the committee of old jana sanghs  the vibrant and hyperactive bjp of today seems to have no work for them in an organisation that amit shah runs with military precision and in corporate style. advani and joshi have been asked to  guide  the party  which seems to be an inside joke on them since hardly anyone knows the inner workings of modi and amit shah s decision making group.in the first five years of the modi government  l.k. advani only managed to utter     words in parliament  even though his attendance was    per cent. in march this year  murli manohar joshi was told to not contest in the lok sabha elections. joshi wrote to voters   bharatiya janata party conveyed to me today that i should not contest the ensuing parliamentary election from kanpur and elsewhere. so  the margdarshak mandal is just a polite way of saying goodbye.also read  advani created the monster  his bjp rap now is just the bitter rant of a dumped leadertogadia  govindacharya and katiyar s impatienceother names such as govindacharya  vinay katiyar and praveen togadia have also been forgotten  or worse still  altogether dismissed as insignificant even after their contributions to bjp s success.govindacharya  at one point  was a co travelling rss pracharak with narendra modi. a famous rss ideologue mentored by l.k. advani  govindacharya was central to developing the concept of social engineering in the rss. that led to the organisation promoting its obc members such as uma bharti  bangaru laxman  kalyan singh  vinay katiyar and sushil modi.another backward caste leader the rss promoted  from a caste that bjp claimed was added to the obc category in      while the congress claimed it was added four months after the leader became a chief minister in       was narendra modi.advani and govindacharya also laid the intellectual basis for the mantra of pseudo secularism and ram mandir through their media briefings  speeches and work in the     s.in spite of this  govindacharya is hardly ever discussed by the bjp  whereas modi s promotion into state and then national level politics is due to the very strategy of govindacharya and advani.similarly  vinay katiyar and praveen togadia of the bajrang dal and vishwa hindu parishad respectively gained infamy as the hate mongering sangh parivar motormouths who demonised indian muslims as people who do not belong in india. both were strategic in mobilising the ram janmabhoomi movement on the ground.the bajrang dal was started by katiyar as a youth organisation to support the ram janmabhoomi movement. a man who could have ideally risen to a chief ministerial position was seen in an interview last year claiming this about building the ram mandir   sarkar ke haath mein kuch bhi nahi hai  it s not in the government s hands . also read  difference between pragya thakur and lk advani is only in the shade of hindutvathe firebrand vishwa hindu parishad leader who was at the helm of the ayodhya noise for nearly two decades  togadia faced much humiliation at the hands of the bjp. in       amid much drama  togadia who went missing after the gujarat police went on a frantic search to arrest him  was found on a road in ahmedabad. he was later removed from the post of vishwa hindu parishad s international working president. from mildly criticising the bjp government in      for not fulfilling its promise of making the ram mandir  pravin togadia now has gone as far as to say that the bjp and the rss have  no intention of letting the ram mandir be built . the disillusionment of togadia with bjp rss is stark. and so is his lack of importance within the bjp and the rss.of course  india eats  breathes and lives on religion. but the ram mandir is no longer only about hindus building a temple dedicated to ram. it is a political spectacle. and the original hindutvawadis who raised the ayodhya pitch have now been sent on a long vanvaas.the author is a political observer and writer. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




squeezing airtel  vodafone won t solve modi govt s credit and fiscal crises
text size  a  a the finance industry is in turmoil. tax collections have hit stall speed. india s credit and fiscal crises are joined at the hip.consider the     billion in past fees that the government is asking from telecom operators. it s a desperate attempt to squeeze money from an industry in which most players have already vanished or gone bankrupt. the two old firms that are still standing amid intense price competition from newcomer reliance jio infocomm ltd. will bear the brunt of the recently court approved demand.among them  vodafone idea ltd. has a one year default probability of  .    according to a bloomberg risk model. that puts its     billion debt within shouting distance of distressed. if vodafone idea goes to banks asking to recast its borrowings  something that the company has so far denied doing  lenders will receive a fresh blow.india s banks are miserable  and not just because they ve already piled up      billion in bad debt. in at least five ways  new delhi s tax kitty  which has grown by just  .   so far this fiscal year  the slowest in a decade  is exacerbating lenders  unease a resource constrained government means that state run banks  which control the bulk of india s loan market  can t expect to get enough of taxpayers  money to make loan loss provisions for past underwriting mistakes  let alone raise fresh capital for growth.with the paucity of state funds curbing new road contracts  construction companies  debt will also sour. they ll be joining electricity producers that are stranded because financially stretched state utilities won t award long term power purchase agreements. some states want to renege on existing deals  even as they sit on   .  billion of overdue payments.as the government starts panicking about revenue  it will try to get funds wherever it can  such as by arm twisting a telecom industry that has no capacity to pay.the tighter budgets mean that the government will shy away from using taxpayers  money to untangle the mess in real estate. shadow banks are in trouble   and dragging deposit taking institutions with them   because of their outsize exposure to failed property projects. all that banks can do about defaulting financiers such as dewan housing finance corp. and altico capital india ltd. is to pretend to restructure their borrowings and kick inevitable losses down the road.finally  after more than two years of tweaks and tinkering  a nationwide goods and services tax   the single biggest economic reform of prime minister narendra modi s government   is failing to generate the kind of fiscal resources that were hoped. the more the government tries to plug its shortfall  the more onerous for large firms to deal with smaller suppliers.the gst came a few months after modi s disastrous november      ban on     of the currency then in circulation. the complicated levy has been an additional source of pain at a time of demand funk in nearly every industry. no surprise that the ratio of nonperforming loans for midsize indian firms has shot up from     at the end of      to   .    compounding the misery for lenders.given the linkages between india s credit and fiscal woes  partial solutions   such as making telecom firms cough up a lot of money suddenly   will only backfire. the twin challenges will have to be faced together.   boombergalso read  telecom crisis  targeting e commerce  is ease of doing business in modi s india a myth subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




development isn t modi buzzwords vikas  achhe din. it s about well being  shashi tharoor
text size  a  a in india  where terms like  acche din    vikas      trillion dollar economy by       are bandied about by the narendra modi government and its supporters  what does  development  really involve too often  in public perception  the performance of the government of the day has been judged on the basis of conventional economic indicators   for instance  gdp growth rate  or the overall size of the economy. but this may not directly correlate with how indian citizens are really doing  to them  their job prospects and employability  personal income levels  the environment  relationships within society  and quality of life matter more  though these are not always easily captured in the common economic indices.some countries have tried to rise to this challenge by evolving other measures of their citizens  welfare. these are often grouped together under the rubric of a  well being budget .also read  modi govt is widening india s fiscal deficit by pumping money into ailing psusmeasuring happinessin may this year  under prime minister jacinda arden s leadership  new zealand announced its first  well being budget   a significant departure from traditional economic planning and allocation of financial resources to a system that assesses the long term impact of policymaking from a social  well being  perspective. among the key points of the budget was an increased emphasis on areas such as mental health  infrastructure for child development  opportunities for indigenous communities and poverty alleviation.the kiwis are not alone in their attempt to go beyond conventional economic matrices. in the late     s  the united nations came up with a human development index. over nearly half a century ago  bhutan made waves with their announcement of a  gross national happiness index   which went beyond the trappings of conventional indicators such as gross domestic product  gdp  and looked at the welfare of their people in a holistic way.similarly  the united arab emirates has allocated a portfolio in its cabinet for a minister of state for happiness  currently held by my good friend sheikh nahyan bin mubarak  as well as a national programme for happiness and positivity that incorporates and promotes  happiness  and  positivity  within major government institutions and programmes.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe welsh have their  well being of future generations act  that seeks to ensure that the long term social and ecological impact of the official policy is monitored. and closer to home  even the state governments of madhya pradesh and andhra pradesh have experimented with forming a  happiness department   albeit with limited success.also read  telecom sector crisis shows india is hanging up on the futuredistraction from pressing needs such departures from conventional policymaking do not sit well with a majority of economists  who feel particularly alarmed by the inherent  subjectivity  with issues such as well being. there is also the concern that such efforts could offer a dangerous distraction from the economic pursuits of a country  as measured by traditional indicators such as growth rate  consumption pattern  industrial production indices and so on.in all fairness  this is an understandable concern. in a country like india  where welfare policies are inextricably linked to the very survival of many  including a large section of our society that continues to hover at the poverty line  there is a strong argument that we cannot afford the distractions posed by illusory endeavours in pursuit of something as elusive as  happiness . especially since so many distractions are actually intended by the modi government and its apologists to deflect attention from the current parlous state of the indian economy.but even as we rightly celebrate our economic accomplishments such as breaking into the top     in the ease of doing business rankings  we cannot afford to ignore the warning bells such as the united nations  global happiness index  where india currently ranks    th among a list of     countries  or the fact that we have the highest suicide rate in south east asia  the most drastic manifestation of our current mental health epidemic that could threaten to derail conventional economic growth altogether in a population where one in three indians struggles with depression.in order to tackle this  we must first accept that a well being budget is not an  either or  proposition. it need not be a substitute for conventional economics  but rather  as a project that will help us develop tools and indicators that take economic outcomes beyond their face value and move towards what the economist richard layard  one of the chief editors of the un global happiness index  terms the ultimate objective of  life satisfaction   which would offer a better measurement of how our citizens are faring   arguably a far more significant duty of the government of the day.also read  freedom of thought is under attack. here s how to save your mindapproach to well beingas commentator martin wolf points out  there are two approaches to implementing a well being budget. one is the approach followed by the kiwis  which has tied down all key government decisions to the larger aim of promoting well being and judging policy through the long term social and ecological impact they have on communities  that often gets missed in the general din of policy assessment . such an approach is admittedly not easy to replicate in a country like india where the population of the state of himachal pradesh exceeds that of new zealand. it might be more worthwhile to consider the second option  which is to have a narrower and dedicated budget solely catering to the well being of our citizens.so while india can continue to embark on traditional economic planning and its ambitious welfare programmes  adopting a separate  well being budget  will allow us to prioritise issues that are inextricably linked to the happiness of all indians   stronger commitments to improving the environment we live in  tackling the issue of deteriorating air quality  for instance  that practically keeps north india confined indoors for much of the winter months . or increased spending on mental health  and not just as a subset of the larger spending on healthcare in india  but dedicated spending that reverses the acute shortage of mental health professionals and builds a strong support infrastructure . and a more sustained effort to equip and provide india s youth  who form the overwhelming majority of our country  the necessary skills and opportunities to thrive.a constitutional obligation to have dedicated expenditure for well being would at least ensure that some priority has to be given to these elements  which are all too often overlooked or minimised in a conventional budget.two centuries and a half ago  the american declaration of independence dedicated itself to  life  liberty and the pursuit of happiness . isn t it time we improved the quality of the first  protected the second and started our own quest for the third the author is a member of parliament for thiruvananthapuram and former mos for external affairs and hrd. he served the un as an administrator and peacekeeper for three decades. he studied history at st. stephen s college  delhi university and international relations at tufts university. tharoor has authored    books  both fiction and non fiction  his most recent book is the paradoxical prime minister. follow him on twitter  shashitharoor. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




how eu lawmakers  kashmir visit  modi s saudi trip   ayodhya verdict are all linked
text size  a  a two days before jammu   kashmir is downgraded and bifurcated into two union territories on    october  as many as    members of the european parliament are travelling to srinagar to check the situation on the ground.by the time the members of the european parliament  meps  fly into the kashmir valley  prime minister narendra modi would have reached riyadh to participate in the third future investment initiative  fii  and meet both king salman as well as saudi crown prince mohammad bin salman  or mbs as he is popularly known.and in another two weeks  chief justice ranjan gogoi is set to deliver the verdict on the most complex hindu muslim land dispute in contemporary india   the land on which once stood the babri masjid and where hindu groups now want to build the ram mandir.all the three issues are connected to india s largest minority  the muslims  and how the modi government is employing outside influencers to help change the perception within.also read  world won t buy modi s high profile diplomacy if he sends far right eu members to kashmir     is not     the pm knows that it will be important to have the saudis on his side   in dealing with the evolving situation in kashmir as well as with the fallout of the babri masjid ram mandir verdict.certainly       is a far cry from      when the babri masjid was demolished  and the demolition got tied up with india s handling of the insurgency in kashmir.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowat that time too  pakistan had led the charge to internationalise the kashmir issue and succeeded to a great extent.in       modi has both political strength as well as charisma on his side. despite the fact there is no opposition to speak of at home  he is taking no chances. he already has a relationship with the saudis. this visit to riyadh is no accident.modi knows that pakistan prime minister imran khan s sliding economy is being bailed out by the saudis  most recently with a    billion cheque. mbs and his father  king salman  moreover  routinely employ retired pakistani army chiefs to head their armies   general raheel sharif  who preceded the current pakistan army chief general qamar javed bajwa  is the head of the    nation islamic military counter terrorism coalition  which is based in riyadh.modi also shares a very close relationship with the crown prince of abu dhabi  sheikh mohammed bin zayed al nahyan  popularly known as mbz. what is less well known but is a very important part of this complex equation is mbs  very close relationship with mbz.the uae sheikh was instrumental in awarding modi the order of zayed  its highest civilian award in late august. according to the latest figures from the un s international organization for migration  there as many as  .  million  or    lakh  indians living in the emirates today  while the figure for pakistanis has dropped to nearly a million     lakh approx.  now.why has this happened  emirati sources say the uae is increasingly uncomfortable with pakistan s linkages with terror and terrorism   especially after      and the discovery of osama bin laden s hideout in abbottabad  within spitting distance of the pakistan army training institute in     .remember the special invitation to former external affairs minister sushma swaraj at the organisation of islamic cooperation  oic  ministerial meeting in abu dhabi in march  it provoked her pakistani counterpart  shah mehmood qureshi  to say that he would not even attend the event.pakistan s loss was india s gain.also read  how foreign media coverage of kashmir crisis has become a headache for modi govtexchanging notes on kashmirand now it seems the pm s visit to saudi arabia to meet the powerful crown prince has been made possible by none other than mbz.the kashmir issue is not formally on the agenda  but it is a matter that both sides will talk about. modi will likely explain the reasons behind dilution of article     and how security forces have since kept peace. he will point out that despite the lockdown   or because of it   there has been very little violence in the valley.modi s plan is to demonstrate that the decision to scrap jammu   kashmir s special status is irrevocable. both the uae and saudis understand the need to employ tough measures   neither are particularly democratic nations. certainly  both arab rulers will be helpful in mitigating any of the diplomatic stress that modi s kashmir decision may have generated.for the time being  us president donald trump is on board   he is a key saudi ally too.both mbz and mbs are willing to give modi the benefit of doubt on kashmir. as do the visiting european parliamentary delegation  most of whom are elected from right wing and extreme right wing parties that revel in anti immigration  anti islam as well as anti euro issues.it is believed the ministry of external affairs as well as the european union embassy in delhi had nothing to do with the mep visit. so  who invited them  did the indian ambassadors to italy  france and germany  from where some of the most right wing meps have come  coordinate their trip to india fact is  the group was given a red carpet welcome  with a meeting with both the prime minister as well as national security adviser ajit doval.these european parliamentarians are spending tuesday night in srinagar  earlier this month  us senator chris van hollen was reportedly denied permission to visit kashmir.by the time pm modi returns from riyadh  the europeans will be back from srinagar. will they exchange notes certainly  in the near future  the kashmir story isn t going away.also read  modi s riyadh visit key to the success of saudi prince s  davos in the desert subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




world won t buy modi s high profile diplomacy if he sends far right eu members to kashmir
text size  a  a is pm narendra modi s high profile diplomacy obscuring serious foreign policy challenges for india  a recent hearing at the united states house of representatives sub committee on human rights should give pause to policymakers in new delhi.from new york to silicon valley to houston  modi s foreign policy initiatives have garnered much attention. modi has personalised diplomacy with visible interactions in informal settings with leaders ranging from barack obama to xi jinping. add to this the government s posture vis   vis pakistan and it is clear that on foreign policy  pm modi is able to satisfy his domestic audience that feels india is  punching below its weight  as brahma chellaney  a national security expert  described it. but is the world buying it also read  several european parliamentarians visiting kashmir are from right wing  anti islam partiesgoing gets tougherthe basic storyline about india is as follows  it is an emerging global power with a growing economy and pluralistic democratic traditions. this combination makes india an attractive partner for western democracies  especially the united states. while russia may be enemy number one in popular perception  there is no doubt that the american foreign policy establishment views china as the real long term challenge.for india too  china presents a formidable challenge. with china pakistan relations in an ever tighter embrace  india and the us have common interests not just in south asia  but in the broader asia pacific. this makes the case for a closer us india relationship a slam dunk  as american basketball aficionados might call it.unsurprisingly  much effort and optimism are being invested in securing a closer strategic alliance between the world s oldest and its largest democracy. at the congressional human rights hearing  both democrats and republicans alluded to the importance of america and india s shared values of pluralism and democracy. but this hearing was tougher on india than many expected.frustratingly for those who work on strengthening the india us relationship  the going has been tougher than expected.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthere are a variety of issues that dog the relationship. and there are two reasons of particular interest.the first is that india s economic heft is still not where it needs to be for it to take more mind space in washington and other western capitals. the second has to do with the rise of majoritarianism as a governing ideology in india.also read  how foreign media coverage of kashmir crisis has become a headache for modi govtnot the calling card india needson the first point  it is no secret that economic power is an integral part of a modern national security strategy. a perusal of us government strategy documents shows that economic well being has been long recognised as a pillar of national security. the latest      national security strategy is replete with references to the us economy. tellingly  the document frequently refers to china as a serious rival in both military and economic terms.china s importance may seem obvious  but data makes things clearer. while china s per capita income is far below that of the us and europe  its economy has deep connections with economies around the world. in       china was the biggest exporter and second biggest importer in the world. the us china trade       billion  was not far behind india s total trade with all nations       billion .according to the world bank s country classification system  china is the only large country  by population  that jumped from low income to lower middle income to upper middle income status between      and     . without a reformed and stronger economy that is fully integrated with global value chains  india is unlikely to measure up to the world s great powers.the other complicating factor is that the united states and the european union still emphasise on liberal values. at the congressional hearing  kashmir took up much of the discussion time and us politicians were clearly expressing concern about what they felt were anti democratic and illiberal moves by the modi government in kashmir and assam. the us administration s representatives at the hearing were more measured and diplomatic. however  they don t face the pressures that politicians face from their constituents. democrats especially were critical.modi s endorsement of trump in houston may also have created some unpleasantness. all this must be seen within the context of numerous reports in international media on mob lynchings  rising intolerance  and general fears over minority rights in india.also read  tough message for modi  political winds are shifting  from nationalism to economy  jobsmodi may have gotten a group of members of the european parliament  meps  to visit jammu and kashmir this week  but it is likely to further damage india s reputation. most of these meps belong to far right parties  known for their anti immigrant and illiberal views. mind you  the modi government did not allow indian opposition mps and senior united states senator  chris van hollen  to visit kashmir. what message is india sending to the world india s calling cards abroad so far have been mahatma gandhi and the secular democracy he died for. if india loses gandhi s ideals  a tighter embrace with key allies such as the united states will be that much more difficult. without internal social cohesion  india s economy will definitely underperform. social cohesion and economic growth are interlinked.unfortunately  as the economist notes in its recent special report on india   narendra modi is damaging india s economy as well as its democracy . blaming international media for  unfair  reporting isn t going to help. stepping back from the rss bjp majoritarian agenda will. it is in india s national interest to do so.the author is a politician  writer  and development expert. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this is why modi  amit shah and bjp aren t losing sleep over ayodhya verdict
text size  a  a after the not so gleeful results of the haryana and maharashtra assembly elections  the bharatiya janata party is keeping a hawk eyed watch on the big ayodhya verdict expected before    november. but it is unlikely that prime minister narendra modi and bjp president amit shah are losing much sleep over the long awaited ruling. the politics of it will go their way regardless.whatever be the judgment  the fallout is likely to help the bjp   a party which  under its current leadership  is machiavellian enough to turn any situation in its favour and manipulate issues to its full advantage. amit shah is organised enough to have strategised for either outcome.it is the ram janmabhoomi movement that provided the platform for the bjp s rise in the early     s under l.k. advani  firmly establishing the party in india s national politics.now  the verdict by the five judge supreme court can give modi s bjp just the right amount of hindutva spring that it needs amid a struggling economy  rampant joblessness and simmering rural discomfort. a favourable ruling would mean taking credit and sounding the victory bugle  a not so favourable one would mean a plum chance to whip up communal sentiments all over again   something the bjp anyway excels at. either way  politics is the winner.to make it even better for the ruling party  ayodhya and ram mandir are issues that can very easily box the opposition into a corner  numbing it into silence.also read  the tale of two ayodhya archaeologists who changed the way we dig up india s hindu historya favourable verdicta ruling in favour of the hindu side will be just what the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss   the bjp and the entire hindutva ecosystem will tom tom as an unprecedented victory  hoping the wave generated from it would see the bjp through in the next few elections.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe bjp speaks directly to its core constituency using hindutva and a majoritarian brand of politics expanding its electoral base. everything else   nationalism  india pakistan border  nrc  citizenship amendment bill  article      welfare schemes   merely build on that rock solid base.just look at what the past few months since the bjp came back to power on    may have been like. the final outcome of the exercise to update the national register of citizens  nrc  in assam may not have been what it hoped for  but that has hardly stopped the bjp from upping the ante on the issue  threatening to implement it in other parts of india and unapologetically drawing the distinction between hindu refugees who deserve respect and the muslim refugees who are  infiltrators termites  and should be  thrown out . for hindus  of course  the citizenship  amendment  bill is the ever available tool.modi s government pushed the triple talaq bill through in parliament  becoming the  good  hindus who eradicate the  evil  in the muslim community. scrapping jammu and kashmir s special status through article     and attempting to herald a new political era in the former state by relegating the abdullahs and the muftis to the periphery played right into the narrative of its akhand  undivided  bharat  majority driven ideology.given how the hearings in the supreme court went  legal experts are of the view that the verdict  in all likelihood  will be in the favour of ram lalla virajman  one of the three parties in the case. if that happens  pm modi  amit shah and the bjp company will go to town taking credit for delivering on a long held promise  making sure it is repeated ad nauseam and drilled into the minds of the party s target voters. and the fact that with a full majority  the modi government chose to wait patiently for the verdict also shores up the pm s image as a leader who plays by the rules. after all  leaders like subramanian swamy have been asking the government to acquire the disputed land and start the construction anyway.also read  priyanka s new up team wants clear congress stand on ram temple  cows   kanwariyasthe other possibilityany other decision that doesn t involve dedicating the entire disputed site at ayodhya to ram would be seen as undesirable by the hindu side. one might assume this would put the bjp on the backfoot. but even a not so pleasing verdict gives modi shah the chance to go shrill on the hindutva front  generate communal frenzy  appeal to the majoritarian sentiment and divert attention from all other issues. this gives the bjp a chance to keep the ayodhya issue alive and burning  just like it did with the nrc issue.the bjp has become shriller on the nrc after the assam list didn t turn out as per its expectations. the bjp is intrinsically a communal force  and all its top leaders   atal bihari vajpayee with the incendiary nellie speech  l.k. advani with the entire ram janmabhoomi movement  modi with the      gujarat riots  and shah with his constant communal rhetoric   have carried that legacy forward.any ruling  one even slightly falling short of hindu litigants  expectations  would mean an unabashed  dangerous high pitch by the bjp and its ecosystem  at work   x   to widen an already prominent wedge between the majority and minority communities and sway voters.this case also has the potential to open the flood gates of litigation by hindu parties against muslim structures near kashi vishwanath and more   another factor that can be enabling for modi shah s politics.the opposition  meanwhile  can do precious little. given the congress  recent history of flirting with  soft hindutva  and parading its janeudhaari  one who wears the sacred thread  leader  it is going to do a tightrope walk  irrespective of how the bjp plays it.the ayodhya verdict  whichever way it goes  can potentially be a win win for narendra modi and amit shah  and a severe test for the opposition.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




even a manufactured panchayat poll leadership in kashmir by modi govt may not be enough
text size  a  a the most recent debate on kashmir has been on the issue of scrapping of article     and the communication lockdown imposed by the narendra modi government since its   august decision. article     was a self contained code that defined and regulated the relationship between the state of jammu and kashmir and the union of india  carefully drafted so as to ensure the smooth accession of the former princely state. with the adoption of the jammu and kashmir s constitution in       it is moot whether article     in its temporary form remained relevant. and from my own interlocutors during my visit to srinagar last month  my long held conviction turned out to be true  article     was widely considered redundant.prime minster narendra modi has himself contended that the special status enjoyed by jammu and kashmir deprived it of development. but the fact is that the former state was able to legislate and successfully enforce the big landed estates abolition act       under its first prime minister sheikh abdullah. as any critic will concede  the act was the most progressive land reform introduced anywhere in india.this progressiveness also accounts for the former state of j k  despite a somewhat skewed development with   .   per cent of the state s population living below the poverty line. under former chief minister farooq abdullah  j k became the first state in the country to provide free education to all children up to high school. the success of that initiative is demonstrable in the high rate of success of young men and women from j k clearing the all india services examinations. the rhodes scholar for       sameer rashid bhat  was a kashmiri.also read  an unintended effect of modi govt s kashmir lockdown   militants caught in their own trapthat said  from      onwards  amendments to article     initiated by the state legislature had brought the article to almost complete compliance with india s laws  with the provision simply delaying adoption even of the most progressive laws like the right to information  rti . although  the act adopted in      was far more progressive than the national law brought in     . the scrapping of article      therefore  could readily have been explained to a disgruntled citizenry as a logical conclusion of a phase of the state s constitutional evolution and their cooperation could have been sought in building a new  more promising phase.but in addition to the presidential orders  which scrapped article     of the constitution  parliament   through the jammu and kashmir reorganisation act of        downgraded the status of the state of jammu and kashmir  bifurcating it into two union territories  one with a legislature and one without . it is again moot whether the indian federal scheme   as exemplified by articles   and   of the indian constitution   allows for parliament to downgrade a federal entity into a unitary form  which a union territory is. moreover  by imposing a brutal lockdown in the state to back the tearing away of what was no more than a fig leaf  detaining those who had always been loyalists of the indian state and participants in governments that had readily acted under the directions of the intelligence bureau  ib   the narendra modi government has administered to the kashmiri public a slap in the face.the next phase of the relationship of kashmiris with india is grave if we lose the valley s educated and talented youth to hatred. thousands of them  including children  have been detained under the draconian public safety act  psa   to be held indefinitely without trial. these will now lead the state into its future. the modi government  out of fear of public reprisals  has sealed shut srinagar s cathedral mosque  its compound fencing laced with concertina wire but neighbourhood mosques where i joined in prayer are flourishing and remain a live conduit for communication.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  modi shah weathered kashmir storm because west has no moral right to lecture india anymoreunexpectedly  the public has responded not with widespread violence but with a totally silent but exhaustive shutdown of its own with markets opening only early morning and late evening to allow homes to continue functioning  covering every town and village in the valley. this has effectively denied a hard put state government s struggle to trumpet a return to normalcy. as a young restaurateur told me as i walked on the bund on    august  the walls of which are plastered with graffiti declaring  f  k patriarchy  and  f  k classicists    we are used to this and will survive. yet  given the fact that the new dispensation is unlikely to affect the functioning of government in j k that will continue with its existing instrumentalities  the way forward can only be secured by reaching out to the people  by allowing them the liberty of article         a  of the constitution of india  their right to freedom of speech and expression  including the free use of modern technology. the modi government is seeking to do this by activating the panchayati raj system. this is possible only with public participation but those elected in the nine phase panchayat elections are from the margins of society who have been persuaded to participate for personal gain  and under threat from people in their respective villages.besides  for this  jammu and kashmir s own panchayati raj act        will have to be first brought into compliance with article      part ix  of the constitution of india. the only measure the central government has so far taken in this regard is to make provision for social audit. surely  even aleadership as one manufactured through this panchayat route will want a voice.also read  requiem for a dream  kashmir needs a heavy dose of post nationalismbusiness in j k is at a standstill  the government s announcement of minimum support price for the bumper apple harvest has received little response  and schools  although open and staffed  are unable to hold classes  even though examinations are imminent. an early restoration of respect for the rights of india s citizens  including land rights no matter how recalcitrant in the eyes of the establishment through the restitution of full statehood  must be the first step if a way forward is to be found. such a step will find universal kashmiri support  including  even if only tacitly  among the  separatists .the writer is former chairperson of the national commission for minorities. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india inc loves retired bureaucrats. modi govt can stop the stink with cooling off period
text size  a  a indian corporate sector loves retired bureaucrats  especially those who have held important posts in  atm ministries    where serving bureaucrats have the power to grant favours to the private sector. and so it didn t come as a surprise when former central vigilance commissioner k.v. chowdary landed a cushy  high paying job with india s biggest private sector entity   reliance industries limited   a little over four months after his retirement.there is nothing illegal in chowdary joining the board of reliance industries  ril  as an independent director. but his appointment does highlight the need for urgent reforms in the indian bureaucracy where a reasonable cooling off period is mandatory before officials retiring as secretaries in important ministries or those part of a crucial government entity or regulator take up private work. the perception of bureaucrats making policies either for a quid pro quo or a post retirement job is dangerous for governance.before joining the ril  chowdary was a director on the board of ccl products  india  ltd  a post he took up barely a month after demitting office as the head of india s top anti corruption watchdog.while it is unreasonable to expect a complete bar on retired bureaucrats taking up new roles  there is certainly a need to ensure their post retirement jobs are not seen as  reward  for work done by them while in office.a former petroleum secretary landing a highly paid job with a big private sector petroleum company soon after retirement can t just be a coincidence. or a former civil aviation secretary joining the board of directors of an airline company will raise some stink.bureaucrats have the right to supplement their income after retirement but their private sector associations immediately after being relieved from service will put a question mark on the work they did. this also invariably puts decisions made by those who follow these retired bureaucrats in their positions under suspicion.in chowdary s case  let s not forget that he was chairman  central board of direct taxes  at the time of his retirement and before he was appointed as the cvc.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  how to work like ias officer   lessons taught to   lateral entrants recruited by modi govtretired bureaucrats a prized catchas stated earlier  india inc loves retired bureaucrats. even if they haven t doled out favours to anyone in particular  they remain a prized catch for something like a non executive directorship.consider this report in theprint  for instance. as chairman of the securities and exchange board of india  sebi   retired ias officer m. damodaran was tasked with ensuring that companies followed all rules under the companies act and had the authority to penalise errant firms that flouted the law. after retiring  he became a non executive member on the boards of corporate giants like hero motocorp  tech mahindra  l t  crisil and biocon   the companies that are mandated to follow the sebi rules got someone on their boards who knew how the rules and laws work.another former ias officer u.k. sinha  who too had a long stint at the sebi  similarly landed on the directorial boards of vedanta ltd  a mining company  and havells india.former comptroller and auditor general  cag  vinod rai  whose controversial reports in the alleged scams in  g spectrum and coal blocks allocations continue to be the talk of the town  was on the boards of apollo tyres and idfc.what helps the cause of retired bureaucrats in landing well paying jobs in the private sector is the clause in the companies act  which says that firms must have at least    per cent  non executive  directors on their boards.also read  how the indian civil services continue to remain a boys  clubwhat can be done to begin with  the government can ensure  through an executive fiat  that retired bureaucrats who have held regulatory assignments like cag  cvc or chairperson member of competition commission of india  telecom disputes settlement and appellate tribunal  tdsat   telecom regulatory authority of india  trai   income tax appellate tribunal  itat   pension fund regulatory and development authority  pfrda  and insurance regulatory and development authority of india  irdai   etc  can t take up regular or even part time jobs like non executive directorships immediately after demitting office.in       the department of personnel and training  dopt  decided to increase the cooling off period for retired bureaucrats wishing to take up assignments in the private sector from one year to two years. but the move was scuttled.there is a need to make it happen now  and fast.also  the government must ensure that all requests for waiving the mandatory cooling off period  such as the one that the narendra modi government accepted for foreign minister s. jaishankar to allow him to join the tata group immediately after his retirement as foreign secretary  are turned down. no amount of explanation or excuses can adequately address questions over the propriety of such exceptions being allowed.but  since governments like to retain a stranglehold over their babus  the possibility of this happening is almost zero.when he was leader of the opposition in the rajya sabha  bjp leader arun jaitley had said   pre retirement judgements are influenced by post retirement jobs. while jaitley was making out a case for why retired judges must not get post retirement jobs  his views hold true for bureaucrats as well.after all  who can say with certainty that the decisions taken by a bureaucrat while in office were not aimed at landing a job after retirement subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




shashi tharoor  next parliament session will again see modi govt propose  opposition oppose
text size  a  a as the winter session of parliament looms  i can t help feeling depressed about the predictability of most parliamentary debates in the lok sabha these days.the narendra modi government will propose. the opposition will oppose. if matters come to a head and a vote is called  the government s brute majority will dispose.the merits of the issue will matter little. there will be no reasoned attempts to persuade the other side  or rather  when such attempts are made by the well meaning  they will prove futile  since persuasion  reflection and exchange are not the purpose of the exercise. increasingly  parliamentary debates have become a ritual  the obligatory airing of opposing views  until the whip is cracked and mps duly vote on party lines.even sensible suggestions by the opposition   with which the treasury benches do not in fact disagree   are never adopted  since to do so would be admitting the possibility of flexibility in government legislation in the lok sabha. the only time that opposition views are taken into account is when the outcome of the vote would otherwise be uncertain   like in the last few years  in the upper house. and now even that is changing as the modi government is establishing a majority in the rajya sabha as well.but in the lok sabha  secure in its overwhelming majority  the government simply chooses not to listen  or to listen with a closed mind. the idea of parliament as a forum for collective deliberation and agreed outcomes has ceased to have any meaning.there is very little real give and take in india s parliamentary system  especially after the      anti defection law inaugurated a practice of party whips on all issues  making receptivity to the ideas of the other side punishable with expulsion from the house. what  one might ask  is the point of such debates at all  other than to nail one s colours to the party mast  why should a serious mp exercise his or her grey cells to come up with constructive suggestions  if they are never going to be considered  let alone adopted also read  at special classes this winter session  mps to get sanskrit lessons from rss affiliatewe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowidea of an ideal parliamentthis was not how it was meant to be. parliament  in the classic british conception  was supposed to be a forum where individual mps of ability and integrity met to discuss common problems and come to agreed solutions. anglo irish statesman edmund burke  in his famous speech to the electors of bristol on   november       articulated most brilliantly and clearly the logic of parliamentary representation. burke was addressing the issue of mps being asked to advocate the wishes of their constituents  rather than themselves  but his logic also applies to the issue of mps parroting their party lines. he is worth quoting in his own words   it ought to be the happiness and glory of a representative to live in the strictest union  the closest correspondence  and the most unreserved communication with his constituents  or here  if you prefer  read  party  . their wishes ought to have great weight with him  their opinion  high respect  their business  unremitted attention. it is his duty to sacrifice his repose  his pleasures  his satisfactions  to theirs  and above all  ever  and in all cases  to prefer their interest to his own. but his unbiased opinion  his mature judgment  his enlightened conscience  he ought not to sacrifice to you  to any man  or to any set of men living. these he does not derive from your pleasure  no  nor from the law and the constitution. they are a trust from providence  for the abuse of which he is deeply answerable. your representative owes you  not his industry only  but his judgment  and he betrays  instead of serving you  if he sacrifices it to your opinion. in other words  an mp betrays himself and his voters if he surrenders his own better judgement to the dictates of either his constituents or party leadership. as burke explains   government and legislation are matters of reason and judgment  and not of inclination  and what sort of reason is that  in which the determination precedes the discussion  in which one set of men deliberate  and another decide  and where those who form the conclusion are perhaps three hundred miles distant from those who hear the arguments  burke s final point is the clincher   parliament is not a congress of ambassadors from different and hostile interests  which interests each must maintain  as an agent and advocate  against other agents and advocates  but parliament is a deliberative assembly of one nation  with one interest  that of the whole  where  not local purposes  not local prejudices   one might add today   not party lines   ought to guide  but the general good  resulting from the general reason of the whole. you choose a member indeed  but when you have chosen him  he is not member of bristol  but he is a member of parliament .this goes to the nub of the entire issue. what is our conception of what prime minister modi has called the  temple of democracy   is it merely a place to ratify decisions made elsewhere in party cabals or cabinet meetings  whose adoption is rendered inevitable by the previous lok sabha election results  or is it a chamber where the representatives of the indian people assemble to express their considered opinions and thoughtful disagreements  before coming to an outcome in the interests not of a political party but of the country as a whole also read  from manmohan to modi  indian govt has been working to kill rti act   with judiciary s helpdeath of individual libertythe anti defection law was passed with good intentions   the same good intentions with which  the proverb tells us  the road to hell is paved. it was intended to stop the aaya ram  gaya ram practice of legislators crossing the floor in pursuit of power and pelf  which saw state governments  and two central governments  between      and      rise and fall like skittles. the idea was noble  and rested on sound principles  governmental stability matters  politicians must stay loyal to the party on whose platform they contested  the intent of voters must not be betrayed by defections. when the law was first explained by its proponents  there was widespread support  even enthusiasm  for its passage.but how has it worked in practice  it has dramatically reduced defections  but not eliminated them  as we have seen in uttarakhand  manipur  goa and karnataka in recent years. what it has done most effectively is to stifle the voice of the individual legislator. since every single vote in parliament sees a whip being issued  however trivial the subject of the bill  there is no room for honest differences of opinion.disobeying a whip offers grounds not just for disciplinary action by a political party  but expulsion from parliament altogether. no mp who has struggled and strived  and spent  to get elected to his seat lightly places it in jeopardy. his convictions become secondary to the party line. the  argumentative indian  is often on display in both houses  but only when an mp is arguing strictly according to his party s position.as a result  the anti defection law has reduced each mp to a cipher during every vote  a number to be totted up by his party whip rather than an individual of ability  conviction and conscience. this outcome has other effects  it reduces the need for each mp to study an issue thoroughly and come to a position on it  since his own stand no longer matters unless that mp is part of the party leadership. in my experience  most mps only study the bills they are assigned to speak on  the rest sees them dutifully voting as their party whip tells them to.this is  in many ways  a travesty of the parliamentary process. in the uk  where the system originated  no whip was issued even on so fundamental a vote as to whether to authorise the government to proceed with the brexit negotiations. earlier  no whip was issued on whether the uk should support the us in the iraq war. dissent was freely and honestly expressed on both sides of the aisle. such freedom is unknown to the indian mp after the passage of the anti defection law in     .also read  there is still hope for congress. but first  rahul gandhi must quit politicsthe problempart of the problem is that the main provisions of the constitution regarding the legislature were silent about the party system  the later addition of the anti defection clause in the tenth schedule in      was patently illogical since it sought to punish the undermining of an institution that was itself not mentioned in the main provisions. surely the schedule cannot override the main provisions of the constitution did the founders of india s constitution ever intend the party system to be paramount to an individual parliamentarian  obliging him to subordinate his conscience to the party whip also read  bjp   media s continuing obsession with rahul gandhi only shows that he is still relevantthese are questions to which there are no real answers in today s india. but it s time we started asking them honestly.the author is a member of parliament for thiruvananthapuram and former mos for external affairs and hrd. he served the un as an administrator and peacekeeper for three decades. he studied history at st. stephen s college  delhi university and international relations at tufts university. tharoor has authored    books  both fiction and non fiction  his most recent book is the paradoxical prime minister. follow him on twitter  shashitharoor. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




bjp set for victories in maharashtra   haryana but something has changed for modi voters
text size  a  a the bharatiya janata party looks set to register impressive victories in the maharashtra and haryana assembly elections. psephologists  political experts and even opposition apologists agree. but for their track record of reading the public mood horribly wrong which significantly improved after they started instinctively trusting  modi magic  reports from the ground do suggest possible devastation of the opposition parties in yet another round of elections.the opposition also seems reconciled to its fate. unless voters decide to change the usual electoral predictability in the modi era  get ready to watch pre diwali celebrations in the bjp camp thursday when the verdict of these polls is out. but before these celebrations start  let me add a note of caution if only for troll fodder. the poll verdict and its magnitude  if it goes the bjp way  may not mean a thumbs up to the bjp style of politics or governance. if you were on the campaign trail in maharashtra and haryana  you would be surprised how no one is talking about  achhe din  yet. if it s the caste matrix working in the bjp s favour in haryana  the virtual demise of the opposition in maharashtra has got the tina  there is no alternative  factor working for it.but the narratives that are likely to emerge post verdict thursday are likely to be two pronged. first  it would be projected as yet another indicator of prime minister narendra modi s ever increasing popularity and a vindication of his governance model. but  before we discuss its validity  let s look at the second likely narrative that the modi amit shah duo has gifted two new mass leaders in devendra fadnavis and manohar lal khattar  chief ministers of maharashtra and haryana. the party campaign celebrated the two. when was the last time one saw bjp president amit shah dismissed in sheer mug shots on the billboards and posters along with lesser mortals  while fadnavis and khattar stood tall with modi in life size pictures  that too  when the bjp has made nullification of article     its central poll plank and hailed amit shah for completing the unfinished task of sardar vallabhbhai patel. shah addressed    rallies in maharashtra and modi  nine.also read  devendra fadnavis is so strong in maharashtra that he is ready to wrestle  but ring is emptya restlessness in modi eratravelling from mumbai to pune last monday  i made a stopover at lonavala as uttar pradesh chief minister yogi adityanath would be addressing a meeting there. the retail shop owner near the shiv sena office in lonavala  ajit giri  was bitter. his son  employed at general motors  talegaon plant  lost the job as hundreds of automobile hubs located between mumbai and pune were hit by the economic slowdown.giri got a loan to buy his son a jeep to transport retail items. his son  a mechanical engineer  now has to often sleep in the jeep during his hectic travels.giri  a modi voter  sounded a bit disillusioned   what have we got  people still think achhe din shayad aayenge  but my son has lost the job. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhat about fadnavis   what has he done   giri responded in exasperation.so  was he thinking of voting out the bjp  he was non committal   who else is there  let s see. people have hopes but nothing is happening. near adityanath s meeting venue about a kilometre away  a group of people shared similar stories of unemployment forced by the closure of factories. they would vote for the bjp nonetheless. a familiar story of lingering hopes from modi again.adityanath finally came to deliver an impassioned speech about how the removal of jammu and kashmir s special status  through article      made the idea of  one nation  great nation  a reality and how it was the  final nail in the coffin of terrorism .bjp workers clapped while others heard him nonchalantly. travel down south to pune and satara  you encounter scores of ajit giris who had great hopes from modi  but who are starting to grow restless. they haven t lost hope in modi yet  though.also read  nathuram godse has a lot to give to the opposition in maharashtra s assembly electionmore than modi magic neededon the way to pune  my cab driver shared a joke apparently circulating on social media.  before modiji came  people thought they had nothing and he would give them everything. now they think whatever they had  wahi kaafi tha. wahi bach jaye  bahut hai  whatever they had was good enough  if they retain it  it s enough .  mind you  the driver was a  modi fan .the fact that even modi supporters no longer mind cracking a joke about him should worry the bjp.another noticeable change since the      polls is people s inclination to differentiate the national from the local elections. the assembly elections after      lok sabha polls were all dominated by the personality cult around modi  with few bothering about the bjp s chief ministerial candidates.five years later  people still talk about modi but the chief minister s performance and local  regional issues seem to dictate their political thinking. if you were to drive from ratnagiri to mumbai and ask about modi or fadnavis or the dilution of article      you would inevitably end up discussing the pathetic conditions of the state and national highways. it s understandable as the     km drive takes around    hours.fadnavis and khattar are not a shivraj singh chouhan or a raman singh yet in terms of mass appeal. people in maharashtra and haryana find them  nice men  and many consider them honest too  but people wouldn t vote in their names the way they did in madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh for chouhan and singh.also read   modi wave  gave bjp haryana in       but party is looking at cm khattar this timewith wholesale defections of opposition leaders into the bjp camp   and reverse migration  though on a smaller scale   the differences between the parties  ideologies and individuals were getting blurry for a section of voters. there was no dominant campaign issue either  even though the bjp did its best to make nationalism and article     the big poll issues. if it was about jat and non jat consolidation in haryana  it was the battle of marathas in western maharashtra constituencies. in satara  for instance  the national congress party was asking marathas to avenge the registration of a money laundering case against sharad pawar  their tallest leader  the bjp  on the other hand  was banking on the descendants of chhatrapati shivaji  who had defected from the ncp  to get marathas on its side.whatever may be the results on    october  it won t be all about narendra modi  for a change. much of it would be a reflection of the opposition s death wish.another electoral victory of the bjp could result in the party becoming more unmindful and dismissive of the people s growing impatience with the government s performance  especially its economic management. modi seldom talks about his achhe din promise  but people still remember it. these voices from the ground are  however  likely to be drowned in victory celebrations thursday.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




supreme court is going back on promise of transparency  building case for modi govt s njac
text size  a  a it took the supreme court collegium just about two years to come to the conclusion that transparency isn t a good thing when it comes to its own functioning. the supreme court this week put out a    word  statement  informing the public about chief justice of india ranjan gogoi led collegium s decision to recommend elevation of two high court judges as chief justices. nothing explains its refusal to not disclose the reasons behind the decision.this completely goes against the unanimous resolution the five judge collegium led by then cji dipak misra had passed on   october     . current cji ranjan gogoi was a signatory to the resolution.titled  transparency in collegium system   the resolution had stated  all  decisions henceforth taken by the collegium indicating the reasons shall be put on the website of the supreme court  when the recommendation s  is are sent to the government of india  with regard to the cases relating to initial elevation to the high court bench  confirmation as permanent judge s  of the high court  elevation to the post of chief justice of high court  transfer of high court chief justices judges and elevation to the supreme court  because on each occasion the material which is considered by the collegium is different. more crucially  the collegium had said that the resolution was  passed to ensure transparency and yet maintain confidentiality in the collegium system .many legal experts and retired judges weren t too enthused with the resolution and said it wouldn t ensure complete transparency in the manner in which judges are appointed or transferred by the collegium. but many others felt that it was at least a step towards opening up the opaque system of appointments controlled by the higher judiciary   where  link or connection   particularly with judges  rather than the candidate s merit becomes the main criterion.also read  law minister ravi shankar prasad questions sc for retaining collegium systembuilding a case for njacbut the supreme court collegium s recent decision shows that transparency is perhaps the last thing on its mind. its    october decision   of elevating rajasthan high court judge mohammad rafiq as the chief justice of meghalaya high court  and punjab   haryana high court judge ravi ranjan as the chief justice of jharkhand high court   is heavy on arbitrariness  without offering any reasons for the collegium s change of heart.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmoreover  the collegium also misses the point that its decision goes against the constitutional bench s judgment in the national judicial appointments commission  njac  case.by going against the standards and principles the collegium itself has set  the supreme court is merely strengthening the narendra modi government s argument that the top court was wrong in striking down the njac act  which would have allowed the central government a say in the appointment of judges to the supreme court.the transparency and reforms that india was assured two years ago are yet to be delivered  in fact  it seems to be a case of one step forward  two steps backward.instead of moving towards total transparency  the supreme court collegium has adopted an opaque system where all that one can expect is a statement about the decision on the court s website.also read  justice tahilramani s resignation shows why supreme court collegium is a failed systemcollegium should revisit judgmentsit may not be a bad idea for the members of the current collegium to re read all the four judgments of the constitutional bench of the supreme court against the njac   along with the lone dissenting note by justice jasti chelameswar   to understand why its latest move is uncalled for.the collegium can start by reading this part of the judgment penned by justice jagdish singh khehar   the sensitivity of selecting judges is so enormous  and the consequences of making inappropriate appointments so dangerous  that if those involved in the process of selection and appointment of judges to the higher judiciary make wrongful selections  it may well lead the nation into a chaos of sorts. while justice khehar was building a case against the njac  which was the government s brainchild  these words hold equally true for the collegium as well.the collegium could also see what justice kurian joseph wrote on the issue of transparency in his concurring judgment in the njac case   i agree with chelameswar  j. that the present collegium system lacks transparency  accountability and objectivity. the trust deficit has affected the credibility of the collegium system  as sometimes observed by the civic society. quite often  very serious allegations and many a time not unfounded too  have been raised that its approach has been highly subjective. but it is justice chelameswar s dissent that exposes the irrationality of the collegium s latest move. it is a matter of public record that in the last    years  after the advent of the collegium system  number of recommendations made by the collegia of high courts came to be rejected by the collegium of the supreme court. there are also cases where the collegium of this court quickly retraced its steps having rejected the recommendations of a particular name made by the high court collegium giving scope for a great deal of speculation as to the factors which must have weighed with the collegium to make such a quick volteface. such decisions may be justified in some cases and may not in other cases. there is no accountability in this regard. the records are absolutely beyond the reach of any person including the judges of this court who are not lucky enough to become the chief justice of india. such a state of affairs does not either enhance the credibility of the institution or good for the people of this country   the judge wrote.one can t be faulted for thinking that justice chelameswar was making a plea to the members of the current collegium.but  like several other bad decisions by the collegium  this one is also not expected to be reversed  at least not anytime soon.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




an unintended effect of modi govt s kashmir lockdown   militants caught in their own trap
text size  a  a every insurgency reaches a critical stage where some imperceptible shift in strategy changes the nature of the campaign  guaranteeing success or failure. mao zedong  the founding father of the people s republic of china  used to call it  contradictions of purpose . the basic idea was to use civilians as human shields  and force the state s security apparatus to overreact and alienate the local population.however  when state forces don t fall into the trap  it s usually the insurgents who start losing popular support. by torching apple orchards  attacking traders  and killing an apple trucker and a stone crusher  militants in the valley are simply betraying their desperation and sowing the seeds of their own irrelevance. the unintended consequence of the communications blackout was that the security forces couldn t react even if they wanted to  but the  contradictions of purpose  brought upon by the narendra modi government with its   august move have refracted to start impacting the militants in the valley.orchards provide coverto understand why this has happened  we need to understand why apples and stone crushing are important to kashmiri militants. apple orchards have only one house in the middle of a large tract of land  insulated from prying eyes in villages and smaller towns where everyone knows everyone else. with the foliage growing outwards up to    feet  an apple tree blocks the line of sight and makes for the perfect cover for militants to move around freely. apples being highly nutritious  an apple orchard thus creates a perfect ecosystem to harbour insurgents coming from a hazardous border crossing.unfortunately for the militants  the apple orchard owners are also the biggest source of intelligence for security forces  as i learned in the core apple growing districts of south kashmir   shopian and pulwama. about    per cent of the actionable human intelligence comes from these cultivators  who accept payment from militants to give them shelter but inform the security forces the moment they leave. this is done for two reasons  first  nobody wants a shootout in their orchard  and second  the reward for handing over a militant is far too good for subsistence farmers to resist.also read  after   killings in one day  traders told to load trucks on highways   main roadswhen militants act  forces reactthe apple harvest also dictates the cadence of the insurgency and counterinsurgency operations. given the extreme danger of operating in the august october harvest season  when the apple trees are dense  security forces avoid going into the orchards. this is usually when militants plan most of their attacks  putting the foliage to good use. when the trees start shedding in mid october and go completely barren by november  security forces go hunting. one of the greatest worries of the local security commanders was that the blocking of mobile services had completely shut them off from this timely intelligence that they needed during august september to fend off terror attacks from mid october onwards.looking back  we can now say it was probably for the good since we know other forces were also at work. the orders from pakistan dictated a complete halt to economic activity  to  show solidarity with the kashmir cause . in effect  this made the insurgents forcibly turn on their biggest benefactor in the valley   the apple farmers. the first turning point came in mid september when an orchard was burnt down and a cultivator family was attacked in sopore.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin the past  the smooth running of the apple business was seen as critical to the functioning of militancy  so it came as a surprise to the cultivators that this was no longer the case. during my visit  i filmed the gathering of the early september crop of the  kullu  variety having been successfully evacuated by stealth  mostly at night  for fear of militant retaliation  and preparations were underway to do the same for the october harvest between  th and   th  which includes the maharaji and delicious varieties. clearly  the rise in violence against apple farmers and their orchards indicates that instead of cowing down the farmers  the militants have only succeeded in aggravating them. and so  once mobile services are fully restored  the quantum of tip offs is only going to rise.also read  modi govt s plan to empower kashmir economically   disempower politically will cost indiabusiness that provides financethe stone crushing is a different story altogether. dominated by mafia groups across india  the situation in kashmir is no different. much of what happens  happens illegally. in my interviews with stone crushers from jharkhand at a clearly illegal operation  the workers told me they had been well looked after. within days of the mobile blackout  the quarry owners had provided them with landline phones with free calls to home. the local police  however  confirmed that the stone crushing business continues to attract protection from higher echelons.they also confirmed the existence of a  hafta  model where quarry owners would pay militants a fee to be left alone  unlike the informal arrangement mining companies have in the naxal belt. while there was no unanimity on this  primarily because money laundering is one of the weakest points of both intel and security operations in the valley   officers estimate that anywhere between    and    per cent of local operating funds comes from such extortion by militants.to sum up  apple orchards provide the cover and stone quarrying the finances for significant parts of the kashmir militancy. the fact that these two critical assets are being attacked  shows that in some form  the indian state has reversed the  contradictions of purpose  onto the militants  who are now not just preventing people from earning their livelihood but also compromising their own operational advantages due to orders from islamabad. delhi may or may not have realised this  but this could very well be the turning of the tide  where pakistan s insurgency strategy is at direct variance with its diplomatic need to  internationalise the dispute .the author is a senior fellow at the institute of peace and conflict studies. he tweets  iyervval. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




xi jinping s tight embrace of nepal is bad news for modi s neighbourhood first policy
text size  a  a chinese president xi jinping literally put the famous chinese proverb into action   the journey of a thousand miles begins with one step   when he became the first chinese head of state to visit nepal last week after a gap of    years.this was reason enough for india to sit up and take notice of how china s long standing plan of  encircling india  is coming to fruition slowly and surely under president xi.but in its zeal to have an  informal  dialogue with beijing  the outcome of which has been so far nothing  new delhi lost an opportune moment to apprise xi jinping of its concerns on the growing chinese influence in india s immediate neighbourhood.in a span of seven days  the chinese president had formal dialogues with two of india s immediate neighbours   pakistan and nepal   signing agreements and communique. in contrast  xi jinping held just an informal dialogue with narendra modi  which too was shrouded in secrecy.also read  loss of friend nepal   restive kashmir  modi s plate is full as he meets china s xi jinpingbid to end india s overarching influencethe biggest takeaway from xi s visit to nepal  which india has tried to downplay  is china s assertion that it will safeguard the himalayan nation s  independence  sovereignty and territorial integrity  and that nepal should choose its social system and development  independently .this was a clear hint by the chinese side at india s growing interference in nepal s sovereign matters  something that nepal has also firmly stated  especially under prime minister k.p.s. oli. nepal has made it clear that it wants to free itself from india s overarching influence in its domestic matters. however  there are still some challenges in the china nepal relationship  like the delay in signing the extradition treaty that has reportedly upset xi.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nownepal  nevertheless  continues to depend on india economically. india accounts for nearly two thirds of nepal s trade and is the sole supplier of fuel. but this scenario is rapidly changing.border blockade a foreign policy disasterif not anything  xi s visit was beijing s answer to the      border blockade for which nepal blamed india. although india denies nepal government s accusations that the border blockade was planned by new delhi  it is a fact that the modi government was upset with nepal s then newly promulgated constitution and had even suggested that changes be made to it so as to satisfy the madhesis and janjatis.the way india handled the      border blockade was probably the modi government s biggest foreign policy disaster in its first tenure. during the unprecedented blockade  shipments of fuel  food  medicines and other essential items from india to nepal were stopped.the border blockade also happened at a time when nepal was just getting back on its feet after a devastating earthquake and needed india s support more than ever.relationship between india and nepal has always been special. both share a working border and people from both countries travel for work and tourism  seamlessly.however  after a prolonged maoist revolution and overthrowing of the monarchy  when nepal finally rolled out its own constitution in september       new delhi was anything but happy.also read  india must rethink strategies on national security if it wants to join ranks with us  chinanepal boxed in a  neighbourhood first  cornerthe fight between india and china over nepal is not new but when the modi government came to power  it announced that  neighbourhood first  will be the cornerstone of india s foreign policy. pm narendra modi even made a state visit to nepal in august      and gave a speech at the country s constituent assembly.  my visit is focused on development and a new beginning between the two countries   modi had said.in       when modi went for his third bilateral visit to nepal  the objective  not surprisingly  remained the same. it was all about bringing substance and seriousness to the relationship. it was all about words and there was no visible signalling from nepal that it would consider india s sensitivities.in fact  the big jolt for india came when nepal joined china s mega infrastructure plan  the belt and road initiative  bri   even as new delhi dragged its feet on the regional connectivity project bbin  bangladesh bhutan india nepal  motor vehicles agreement  mva  after thimpu rejected it.a landlocked nation  nepal was under considerable pressure from india to not join the bri. but contrarily  nepal was never given the leeway by india to stand on its own feet even as new delhi continued to harvest its influence in nepal s internal socio political theatre.china is now doing all that. it is building roads and ports in nepal and has given the country access to its seaports in tianjin  shenzhen  lianyungang and zhanjiang  as well as dry ports in lanzhou  lhasa and xigatse  under a trade and transit agreement.very soon  kathmandu will be connected to the chinese border in the north while a separate rail link will bring nepal s capital and tibet much closer.in       china had announced a    billion project to transform lumbini  gautam buddha s birthplace  into a major pilgrimage and tourist centre in nepal. it seems  so far  a stupa has been built while several other projects to develop lumbini are underway.nepal is also upset with india over its lack of enthusiasm to move on regional initiatives like the south asia association for regional cooperation  saarc .growing china nepal defence tiesnepal is increasingly looking at china for greater defence cooperation. in june this year  nepal s army chief purna chandra thapa visited china where he reiterated kathmandu s adherence to the  one china  policy.strategically  india is losing the ground on nepal and ceding the space to china. it has not been able to complete the projects in nepal on time  neither has it been able to enhance its security and defence relationship with the neighbour. new delhi knows that a stable nepal is in india s interest  given the porous border the two countries share.also read  foreign aid to nepal   maldives gets big boost as modi govt puts  neighbourhood first subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




from manmohan to modi  indian govt has been working to kill rti act   with judiciary s help
text size  a  a union home minister and bjp president amit shah asserted last week that indian citizens do not feel the need to file applications under the right to information act because the narendra modi government has set high standards in transparency in governance.while amit shah is certainly correct in saying that indians no longer seem keen enough to file rti applications  the reason isn t what he wants us to believe. fourteen years after it became a tool in the hands of citizens to get information from their government  the rti is dying a slow but certain death in india.who s to blame apart from the usual suspect   the narendra modi government  which should be blamed for the possible failure   the transparency movement propelled by the rti act is headed towards a gradual halt. while the modi government has done everything in its power to cut to size the bureaucracy manning the rti act as well as the activists and common citizens using it  the blame for stifling the law also lies with spineless information commissioners and the constitutional courts  particularly the supreme court.here s a simple question for those who file rti applications and follow the implementation of the rti act  who is the current chief information commissioner  if you don t know  don t feel embarrassed  even i had to google his name. sudhir bhargava  as the chief information commissioner  is expected to push and prod  and  if required  through his words ensure that the government departments take the rti act seriously. but he has done so little in this regard that few seem to realise the cic is still a functioning body.no government wants something as  silly  as transparency to come in the way of making it more accountable. but the cic s actions  or the lack of them  clearly show that the transparency watchdog also seems to agree with the government. when was the last time that the cic showed a sense of urgency over an appeal of great public importance or passed a strongly worded order if the information was denied on specious grounds by a government department also read  amit shah says govt wants to reduce dependence on rti by actively giving out informationthis rot is not newsince    october       when the rti act began to be implemented  successive governments have used every trick in the book to make it toothless and weaken its provisions.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfrom turning the cic and the state information commissions into parking grounds for retired bureaucrats  particularly those who had turned denying information into a fine art during their tenure with the government  to keeping posts vacant  the central and state governments did everything to keep information out of the public domain. they ensured that departments and officers manning them were never forthcoming while dealing with rti requests.the manmohan singh government had accepted the cbi s demand that the investigative agency be taken out of the purview of the rti act  a strange demand considering that the cbi was already exempted from giving out any information related to ongoing probes and cases. but  notwithstanding the fact that the request was made at the time when the agency was probing the politically sensitive cases like the  g scam and the commonwealth games scam  the manmohan singh government accepted the demand to keep the cbi out of the rti act.singh also said that the rti law is being misused by  frivolous and vexatious  requests for information. everyone knows that the adjective  frivolous  is a popular byword for a political impulse to dilute one of the most potent transparency laws in modern indian history.a canard was also spread much before modi came to power that rti was being used to blackmail. and it is  of course  no coincidence that many corruption cases that were unearthed during singh s government began with a simple rti request.the nda government headed by narendra modi also did its part. in july  the government got controversial amendments to the rti act passed in parliament without prior public consultations. these amendments empowered the central government to make rules with regard to the tenure  salaries  allowances  etc  of the central information commissioners and all state information commissions  sics .but  more worryingly  over two months after the amendments were passed and president ram nath kovind gave his assent  the ministry of personnel is yet to make the new rules governing the amended act public.also read  ed can withhold names mentioned in panama papers  says central information bodyjudiciary too played its partthe higher judiciary  which used to be at the forefront of transparency movement  is also maintaining a studied silence. this silence became more pronounced after the judiciary  particularly the supreme court  itself became the subject of a debate on lack of transparency in its functioning.important appeals against judgments of high courts with regard to bringing appointments through the collegium system under the rti act are languishing somewhere in the registry of the supreme court with no attempt whatsoever to speed up the hearings.the cic may not have made its annual report for         public  a report card by the satark nagrik sangathan and the centre for equity studies lays bare all that is wrong with the implementation of the rti act in india.the exhaustive report   the two organisations ironically used the rti route by filing     applications across the country   points to the fact that several state information commissions are either non functional or were functioning at reduced capacity because  posts of commissioners  including that of the chief information commissioner  were vacant .while tripura has no information commission since may       andhra pradesh state information commission remained non functional for    months between may      and october     .currently  there are four vacancies in the    member central information commission  while pendency has been rising every month. there are more than        applications pending with the cic.here s another worrying factoid  if you filed an appeal in the andhra pradesh state information commission  it could take about    years before your appeal could be decided. the corresponding period for west bengal is seven years and five months  and for odisha it is four years and three months.this is what is killing the rti in the country   besides the rti activists being routinely targeted  often fatally. according to the commonwealth human rights initiative     rti activists have been killed in india since october     .the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




william kate s pakistan visit hardly matters to modi but india will follow it closely
text size  a  a the second in line of succession to the british throne prince william and his wife kate middleton have arrived in pakistan for a five day visit that is being described as their  most complex  tour to date  according to a kensington palace handout.they will travel more than      kms across the country  to islamabad  lahore  gilgit baltistan as well as to the rugged border regions to the west  in a trip that is expected to be part empire nostalgia and part hardnosed foreign policy.no one in delhi has said a word about the royal visit  which comes three years after william kate came to india and bhutan and included a much photographed tour to the taj mahal  but everyone is clearly watching carefully.no change in india s standneither william nor kate s bushels of clothing or diamond tiaras  nor their carefully vetted speeches will change narendra modi s views on kashmir. new delhi retains a more than substantial belief that the british raj didn t play totally fair when it came to the partition of india in     .remember mountbatten  the last viceroy who advanced instead of postponing the break up of the country by several months  thereby setting in motion the massacres  the blood letting and an exchange of populations that both countries are still coming to terms with   well  he was a relative of queen elizabeth and her husband philip.so when mountbatten s great grandnephew william is likely to tell his hosts in islamabad tuesday night that  you can always rely on the uk to keep playing an important role as a key partner and friend   pakistan will cheer  prime minister imran khan will polish his oxbridge accent and the red carpet will be brushed to a new gleam.also read  modi shah weathered kashmir storm because west has no moral right to lecture india anymorewe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbritish politics   kashmirindia will  meanwhile  shrug her shoulders and point to the political irrelevance of the british royalty. they don t count  elected politicians do. but at a time when britain s determination to exit or not to exit the european union has claimed the scalp of one british prime minister and threatens another   boris johnson  whose estranged wife is half indian  only has two weeks to meet an eu deadline   delhi knows that in the gathering political shadows at westminster  it s not a bad idea to be friendly with the monarchy.this is because jeremy corbyn  uk s labour party chief  has gone out of his way to be unhelpful on kashmir. at the party conference in brighton in mid september  corbyn called for international observers to  enter  the besieged valley  at the time under total lockdown  and demand the right for self determination for its people.in early september  labour party mp liam byrne from the birmingham hodge hill constituency led a march to the indian high commission  along with several thousand pakistani origin supporters  protesting the scrapping of article    . tomatoes and stones were thrown at the building.naturally  india registered a strong protest against both the actions. this monday      british indian organisations  including the hindu forum britain  the british sikh association  the jain network  wrote to corbyn  warning that his  one sided  views on kashmir could damage relations with india.at least some battle lines are being drawn in britain. it s a no brainer that labour s enthusiastic rank and file is significantly drawn from the pakistani immigrant network  london s mayor sadiq khan is of pakistani origin   which the labour hopes will help tip the balance when elections are held  sooner than later.last time around in       the conservative party won     seats to labour s      with the difference in vote share being a little over two per cent  as was the victory margin in about     seats. the labour party knows that in a tight election  it needs the muslim  largely pakistani immigrant  vote.also read  britain meddling in kashmir issue has a lot to do with how pakistani origin people voteshould new delhi care so  what s british politics got to do with william kate s five day visit to pakistan  and should new delhi care first of all  the royal trip shatters all the illusions about pakistan being isolated over kashmir. modi may have charmed the indian american community with his  abki baar  trump sarkar  slogan  but america needs pakistan not only to get out of afghanistan   an endeavour that is likely to take at least a few years   but also use its influence in the middle east. in tehran sunday  imran khan told reporters that trump had asked him to help initiate a dialogue between the us and iran.second  although the british royals are above britain s contested political space and won t do anything to upset that carefully balanced apple cart  william s speech in islamabad will be seen as feeding into the labour party immigrant story. we share unique bonds and so it will always be in our best interests for pakistan to succeed. not least because of the  .  million people living in the uk with pakistani origin and the fact that the uk is one of the biggest investors in pakistan s economy   wiliam is expected to say tuesday night.all this is  of course  par for the diplomatic course. william kate will probably use the exact same phrases whenever they travel abroad. it s true they have no influence on british politics  it is equally true their enormous influence is derived from the people of britain who adore their monarchy.it is in these shadows of power  in the trappings of these conventions that are a palimpsest of both nostalgia and modernity  in the magnificent reach of the commonwealth   of which india and pakistan are members   that the british royals excel.narendra modi instinctively understands the power of that image  however fraying at the edges. after all  he has taken great trouble to manufacture his own image  undeniably backed by a huge majority. it is also why he threw a lunch party for william kate at the magnificent hyderabad house in new delhi when the young couple visited in     .at the end of the day  the william kate visit to pakistan will hardly cause any ripples in the ravi river or change the destiny of the country. but it will be compared  with the previous visits of uk royals   certainly followed and definitely remembered for what it did  didn t or could have achieved.perhaps  the happy ending in this story is that it took place at all.also read  imran khan wants to forge iran saudi peace   goal pakistan has failed to achieve in    yrssubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




if narendra modi wants the nobel peace prize  he can learn a lot from abiy ahmed
text size  a  a india s prime minister narendra modi has received many awards. he often receives international awards and recognition just before key elections in india. it is surprising then  that he hasn t been in the reckoning for the nobel peace prize. if he could win the seoul peace prize  why not the nobel the nobel peace prize goes to either issue based campaigners or peace makers. narendra modi is both. to make a stronger claim for the nobel  modi may want to look at the      winner of the prize abiy ahmed  the prime minister of ethiopia.hope and expectations were high when narendra modi came to power in       defeating an unpopular incumbent government. abiy ahmed became the prime minister of ethiopia under similar circumstances in april     . such was the promise his rise held out that it was termed  abiymania . modi and abiy have another great similarity  both believe in personal touch  especially in diplomacy. both believe in promoting a personality cult around them.to draw an analogy is not to say the two situations are exactly the same. of course  ethiopia is not india. india s gdp per capita is nearly three times that of ethiopia s.the conflict in ethiopia  the number of internally displaced people  the levels of political violence and repression  the number of journalists and political opponents in jail and in exile have all been of a scale that india hasn t seen. except  today we can t be sure if india isn t hurtling down that path.if pm modi wants to win the nobel peace prize  he should see how abiy has been taking ethiopia from authoritarianism to democracy  from repression to freedom  and from conflict to reconciliation. abiy is climbing up a ladder that modi is climbing down.also read  abiy ahmed has won the nobel peace prize  but ethiopia still faces big challengeswe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwho wants a national security state ethiopia was  partitioned  in      when eritrea broke away from it. the separation was messy  and both sides fought a war over territorial claims along the border  especially over one disputed region  from      to     . the war ended in a stalemate. a low intensity conflict continued to take lives. the story would sound familiar to any indian or pakistani.the united nations found that the disputed land should go to eritrea  but ethiopia wouldn t part with it. the conflict over a piece of land cost        lives. among those engaged in the war was abiy ahmed  who was then an army intelligence officer.you would expect an army officer turned president to be a hyper nationalist like modi. instead  abey said ethiopia would follow the recommendations of the peace agreement signed in     . violence and hostility immediately ceased. it is for this effort that abiy has been given the nobel peace prize.narendra modi s rule  by contrast  has only heightened tensions with pakistan. the indian case has always been that the pakistani army wants permanent hostility and therefore uses terrorists. but india can neutralise pakistani terrorism by arriving at a rapprochement with kashmiris. kashmiri alienation from delhi has provided the ammunition to pakistani terrorism.modi s actions  however  have destroyed whatever goodwill new delhi had in srinagar. with the dismantling of the state of j k  the conflict with pakistan has deepened. this raises the risk of terrorism  which will be followed by military action. the vicious cycle of violence could make india a national security state.who needs dissent former army officer abiy ahmed does not want ethiopia to be a national security state. he wants peace  freedom and democracy. his eritrean counterpart wasn t made to share the nobel prize because he runs a repressive regime.since       ethiopia has been run by a coalition of four parties  together called the ethiopian people s revolutionary democratic front  eprdf . elections are a bit of a joke  the eprdf won     out of     seats in     . press freedom was muzzled  opposition leaders jailed  dissenters exiled. when abiy took over in       he released thousands of political prisoners  invited exiled dissenters back  and put dissenting voices in key positions.among them was a former political prisoner and opposition leader who was appointed the head of national election board. abiy wants the      general election to be free and fair. ethiopia is already enjoying unprecedented freedom of speech and expression. the opponents and dissenters in ethiopia were earlier labelled terrorists. in modi s india  they are now labelled anti national  anti hindu and  urban naxals   whatever that means. abiy has significantly expanded political space  modi is shrinking it.in modi s india  journalists could soon start filling up the jails if you look at how the uttar pradesh police has been filing firs against local journalists. while ethiopia wants its elections to be credible  narendra modi s government is going after a dissenting election commissioner by sending his family i t notices. the election commission of india did not come across as impartial in the      lok sabha election. the entire political class in kashmir has been put under house arrest  and a selective anti corruption purge across india is targeting only political opponents. as ethiopia improves on press freedom indices  india s rank has been slipping.there s another area where modi could learn from abiy ahmed in his quest for the nobel peace prize. abiy is reforming ethiopia s economy for real  privatising state owned companies and driving economic growth. india is going through an economic slowdown while ethiopia s growth rate is touching double digits  and nobody is accusing abiy of fudging data .also read  what is the ethiopia eritrea deal  which won abiy ahmed the nobel peace prizeunity in diversitynone of this is to say that all is well in ethiopia  but unlike modi  abiy isn t claiming all is well. greater political freedom has meant ethiopia is seeing a revival of ethnic conflicts. while ethiopia witnesses an aggressive debate over ethio nationalism and ethic nationalism  the fate of  .  million or    lakh internally displaced people hangs in the balance.abiy is trying to strike a balance between federalism and nationalism. given how modi has converted the state of j k into two union territories without people s consent  it is tough to say abiy should look at indian federalism as a model. modi s regime threatens to impose one language  one religion  one election  one party on the country  whereas abiy is figuring out a way for  unity in diversity   nehru style.he has set up a truth and reconciliation commission to end the country s ethnic conflict. modi  on the other hand  could be on his way to putting millions of indian muslims in detention centres and disenfranchising them. as lynchings of muslims continue  his government refuses to act on the supreme court s suggestion of enacting a new law against lynching.abiy s slogan for ethiopia is  medemer   which means adding together  similar to modi s promise of  sabka saath . since abiy ahmed s slogan has been put into practice  he has won the nobel peace prize. modi must do an  informal summit  with him soon to borrow some tips.also read  brazil  ethiopia   kenya  a new wave of unlikely economic reformersviews are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india isn t china s economic or military equal but mamallapuram lets modi stand as tall as xi
text size  a  a mamallapuram and its seaside sculptures have been in the headlines for the last    hours. just as prime minister narendra modi has been. wearing a crisp white tamil veshti and a cream angavastram  modi played the storyteller to the visiting chinese president xi jinping.it is a setting dripping with heavy symbolism. modern leaders of two ancient civilisations meet to discuss trade pacts and border issues. india is not an economic or a military equal to china today. but when it comes to history  india and china are equals. modi and xi can sip coconut water as the two contemporary custodians of ancient cultures. and this is the stage modi has set for xi jinping. this is why mamallapuram is theprint s newsmaker of the week.a date with historysituated on the outskirts of chennai  this unesco world heritage site along the bay of bengal is also known as mahabalipuram.the town mamallapuram derives its name from the word  mamallan   or great warrior   a title conferred on pallava king narasimhavarman i. famous for its rock cut caves and art  mamallapuram was an ancient port city in the pallava dynasty  which lasted from third century to ninth century ad. sea trade flourished at mamallapuram.it is also said that mamallapuram  now protected by the archeological survey of india  finds a place in the works of chinese traveller hiuen tsang. some even say that the pallava kingdom had trade relationships with china.most of the architecture in mamallapuram was built during the reigns of narasimhavarman i and narasimhavarman ii.the town is best known for the caves and the five monolithic rathas  drawing on the pandavas. the shore temple and arjuna s penance  a rock carving  are the other attractions. people in mamallapuram believe that six other similar shore temples are now submerged in the sea. arjuna s penance is  in fact  the largest bas relief sculpture in the world.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  increasing trade and combating terrorism the main takeaways from day   of modi xi summitplaying host to another chinese leaderxi jinping is not the first chinese leader to visit mamallapuram. in       then chinese premier zhou enlai visited the town and even inaugurated a maternity centre at kuzhipanthandalam village  which is now a full fledged primary health centre. kancheepuram collector had received the chinese delegation at that time.the chinese premier during his tamil nadu visit toured the nehru stadium  the integral coach factory  icf  and the famous gemini studio. this was during the heady  hindi chini bhai bhai  years.after independence  mamallapuram became a mandatory tourist destination for foreign nationals and a popular honeymoon getaway for couples in the state. with better connectivity and rapid urbanisation of chennai  mamallapuram turned into an easy weekend escape for the city s youngsters.while mamallapuram comes under the coastal regulation zone  crz   that hasn t stopped the tourism industry from setting up fancy resorts and hotels in the area. taj fisherman s cove is one such resort where xi jinping is meeting modi.conquering tamil nadupeople are cheering as modi is reviving the bilateral trade relations from the very place where the pallava rulers had once established ties with the chinese centuries ago. this is perhaps one of the reasons why modi chose this seaside resort as opposed to his constituency varanasi to hold the second informal summit with xi jinping.mamallapuram does not see the tourism footfall that varanasi does. but varanasi doesn t have the required logistical amenities that mamallapuram has   the aircraft carrying xi and team needed a larger runway  which chennai provided.and  tamil nadu is a state that modi s charm offensive hasn t conquered yet.also read  xi jinping sees himself as architect of china s third revolution after maosubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




privatisation comes to the rescue of modi govt  but accompanied by political risk
text size  a  a the idea of the moment is privatisation. railway stations and trains  airports  the container corporation  shipping corporation  completed highway projects  air india  bharat petroleum   all of them and more are to be put on the block. and we re talking not disinvestment but real privatisation  with change of control   last delivered by arun shourie in the vajpayee government. narendra modi  it would seem  is finally going to act on his stated position that the business of government is not business.there may be other motivations. for instance  to rebuild the government s reputation for positive action  since the view has gained ground that the      demonetisation and the flawed goods and services tax have been responsible to some degree for the economic slowdown. another objective may be to simply close a widening fiscal gap. the government has been announcing one new spending programme after another  and one tax giveaway after another. as the bill has got bigger  tax revenue has fallen short. money has to be found from somewhere  lest the fiscal gap become embarrassing. the reserve bank of india has been made to cough up a one time transfer but that won t be enough. privatisation could therefore be handy   except that  with less than half the financial year to go  much of the announced sale of government assets is unlikely to be done by march end.regardless  privatisation is welcome. fiscal purists would quarrel with the idea of selling assets to pay for current expenditure   such as the payout to farmers and the health insurance programme  for the obvious reason that the process cannot go on forever. at some point  the list of assets available for sale will run out. but that is a distant prospect just now  and on the positive side one must reckon on the systemic benefits of a better use of assets in private hands  and or better service  which is the real logic of privatisation.also read  the economy is india s most potent weapon  but it s losing its powerwill it work  yes  if unlike with air india the last time round  the government puts out sensible terms for sale or lease. as for who might buy  it is true that most domestic business houses are still in de leveraging mode  the focus being on reducing debt. also  many established businessmen find their ability to invest badly eroded by bankruptcy proceedings  or by shares pledged against loans being sold at rock bottom prices. anil ambani  the ruia brothers  subhash chandra  and others have all suffered on this account  while gautam thapar and the ex ranbaxy singh brothers are among those who have seen a loss of both financial as well as social capital. on the other hand  corporate de leveraging over the past few years has reached a point where quite a few companies are sitting on large amounts of cash or have headroom for taking on more debt  but are not investing because of the consumption slowdown. the chance to enter new businesses or buy quality assets may induce them to open their cheque books. besides which  there could be some international interest.all this comes with political risk. the rss chief has sounded a warning on some aspects of policy  and there are stirrings of unrest among trade unions. the modi government is strong enough to over ride such resistance  but it should be aware of reputation risk. privatisation in many countries  including india  has come arm linked with controversy. the risks get heightened when decisions on complex financial questions about long term leases are rushed through in a hurry  without mandatory consultations   something already aired in connection with the lease of airports to the adani group.meanwhile  it is not clear why the focus is on entities in the transport sector. while the privatisation drive is masterminded by the prime minister s office and niti aayog  it could be that two dynamic ministers are in charge of most of transport  nitin gadkari and piyush goyal. but that is no reason for not taking a hard look at the more difficult choices facing state owned entities in other sectors   specifically the loss ridden telecom twins that have no hope of viability  and government banks  which have already swallowed up an unconscionable    trillion of taxpayer money in the past five years.also read  private banks are also in trouble  modi govt must act now to set up resolution capabilitysubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in india s quest for jobs  here s what modi government s policy agenda should be
text size  a  a formulating the right strategy for industrial development and employment generation is particularly important for india  which is undergoing a demographic transition. the number of youths entering the workforce each year        million  is equivalent to the entire population of belgium or half that of australia. this change in population offers a potential demographic dividend a great opportunity to boost the country s growth  provided that the economy can generate productive jobs for these new entrants.policy agendathe importance of policy interventions is often overstated. economic growth  in most of today s western societies  was both endogenous and organic. public policy came into force to protect and secure private wealth and to ensure its later redistribution. consequently  perhaps the best government policy would be to not intervene by throwing sand on the wheels of economic activity.it is unnecessary to dwell on the well known requirements of investing in infrastructure and easing constraints on land  labor  and capital markets. india s central and state governments continue to pursue industrial policies to fulfill them. however  these policies typically focus on larger firms  and more attention needs to be paid to supporting smaller firms.promote productive entrepreneurshipin india  the two most consistent factors that directly correlate to the formality of enterprises in both the manufacturing and services sectors are education levels and the quality of local infrastructure. these correlations have been found to be much stronger in india than in the united states.despite its laudable aim to promote entrepreneurship  india s government may be struggling to encourage entrepreneurship development programs  establish incubators and accelerators  and promote industrial clusters. therefore  a primary takeaway would be to eschew policies that seek to create entrepreneurs or directly promote entrepreneurship. it may be further advisable to limit efforts toward shrinking the informal sector. it could be more productive to create two types of conditions favorable for enterprise creation and growth  physical and enabling. the former involves making improvements to infrastructure  increasing access to credit  providing skilled labor on competitive terms  and so on. the latter involves services that improve the productivity of businesses by structuring them as quasi public goods and subsidized by the government and the enabling of regulatory environments.make starting and growing businesses easierwe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowindia is often considered one of the most difficult places to start and run a business. although its ease of doing business global ranking  produced by the world bank  rose significantly from     in      to    in       big hurdles to starting and growing businesses remain.one of the biggest hurdles that potential enterprises in india face is the complexity of the registration system all enterprises must register separately with multiple entities of the state and central governments.one portal that integrates all state and central government departmental registrations into a single workflow application would be the most effective way to ease the conducting of a business.further  compliance especially related to payments and reporting requirements could be made much simpler. instead of maintaining physical registers  firms could log in to this single portal and  on entering all the relevant data  receive a report that meets their various legal requirements.facilitate access to creditmany informal enterprises are outside the tax system simply because they deliberately operate below the threshold for registration.mudra  which provides loans to microfinance and nonbanking financial institutions for on lending to small entrepreneurs  was established in early     . mudra is needed to address productivity and working conditions in the informal sector and in informal employment. however  policy interventions without benchmarks  and measurements of achievement against such benchmarks  are incomplete and ineffective. it is vital that beneficiaries of mudra loans do not see them as handouts or loans that could be waived  as this would disincentivize borrowers from growing their businesses. unfortunately  that may be happening. there are reports of high rates of repayment failures in loans extended under the mudra scheme.one condition for mudra loans should be that the entrepreneur maintain books of accounts. all mudra borrowers should be required to report their employment generation and productivity data  such as output produced per unit of capital and labor employed.the government should measure the success  or failure  of loans made under mudra by the reduction in informal employment  the rise in formal employment  and the extent that firms become medium and large. these objective criteria will help ensure that decisions are apolitical.accessing credit is not just a challenge for informal enterprises but also for formal start ups.a recent survey found that nearly    percent of the annual credit demand of msmes  amounting to about    trillion rupees  is met through informal channels  where the cost of capital is much higher. further     per cent of formal financing occurs through banks and nonbanking financial corporations and is primarily nondigital.the ultimate goal would then be discouraging informal enterprises from adopting low productivity tactics and methods. in addition to deregulating the environment  enhancing size based thresholds for businesses to avail of financial and other concessions  and lowering compliance and labor costs  increasing access to affordable credit would complete a policy package directed toward msmes.improve tax policies and encourage start ups in indiaarbitrary tax claimsover the last decade  the government has created well meaning initiatives to support entrepreneurship  such as stand up india and start up india. however  one initiative implemented by the tax department in       called the  angel tax   has nullified other well meaning initiatives because it treats the premium over the face value of shares subscribed to by investors as income in the hands of start up businesses.extracting the states  due share of taxes from wrongdoers must be weighed against the cost of hurting and harassing the majority of honest start ups struggling to stay afloat and succeed.inadequate tax incentiveswhile arbitrary tax claims are a big concern  they are offset by other incentives. for instance  the government also gives tax holidays to start ups for three out of seven years  if their sale turnovers do not exceed     million rupees. however  this sales turnover ceiling is too low according to international standards  particularly given the size of the indian economy and the current exchange rate between the indian rupee and the u.s. dollar.the widespread perception that the government is giving away or giving up its tax revenues should be contested. though it may not seem possible to build a bridge between policy initiatives that  appear to  let go of revenues and future economic growth  the association between the two will become apparent in the data on economic growth  employment growth  and tax revenue growth that will emerge over time.according to the world bank s ease of doing business      report  the number of hours spent on paying taxes in mumbai was estimated at    .  hours  a poor comparison to the global average      hours   the oecd average      hours   and countries like singapore in particular     hours .   and the number in mumbai has only been increasing. the number of hours spent in paying taxes was estimated at     in the      report  but after more data on gst payments were obtained  this number was revised to     hours. with this number going up to    .  hours in       pwc  which provided some of the data to the world bank made this note on introducing the gst in       multiple central and state indirect taxes were merged into one with the introduction of the gst system. the transition  however  led to some administrative  operational and system issues that increased the time to comply. for example  the rules for filing and paying gst and for determining the gst rates were not always clearly communicated  there were issues with the functioning of the online portal and not all rules were synchronized prior to the introduction of the gst.considering the number of hours spent in filing taxes and appealing assessments  the hassle of dealing with the bureaucracy has a far higher monetary and morale cost than the actual tax paid.incentivize formal employmentaccording to the world bank s ease of doing business      report  india s total taxes and contribution rate  calculated as a percent of profit  was   .  percent  versus   .  in the      report .in addition to taxes  labor costs are a formidable barrier that stunts the growth of indian businesses  particularly in the formal sector. manish sabharwal  the chairman of teamlease services  a staffing company  wrote that salaries of        rupees a month end up as only       rupees after all deductions  from both the employer and employee sides.these mandatory deductions and the high taxes and contributions squeeze employees  and only some of the employer s burden is passed on via a net reduction in the employee s paycheck. but any reforms that dispense with social protections are not only undesirable  but also unlikely to pass muster politically. solutions to address this issue could range from making these deductions for both sides voluntary to providing a partial public subsidy for some of these contributions.subsidize small business productivity enhancement servicesto create productive jobs  india s central and state governments have proposed industrial policies to attract new business investments. however  by their very nature  industrial policies focused on input subsidies and tax concessions disproportionately benefit larger and more established businesses. they are also very expensive to implement. intense lobbying by these beneficiaries only helps to perpetuate more of the same.much of the mainstream research on business productivity enhancement support has revolved around the provision of trainings mainly to groups of entrepreneurs despite little to no evidence of its efficacy. the problem with training programs is that they are more likely to be employed as an instrument to stoke entrepreneurship than as an effort to address the specific business development challenges faced by entrepreneurs. further  weak state capacity may inhibit the effective delivery of training programs at scale.nicholas bloom  raffaella sadun  and john van reenen  who lead the world management survey  examined management practices from over        firms in thirty four countries and found that  differences in management practices account for about     of cross country total factor productivity differences  with the united states  see figure   . they also found that firms facing greater competition were more likely to have higher management scores.figure   total factor productivity gap accounted for by management practicesbusiness productivity enhancement services could be expanded beyond supporting an individual firm s specific management services to include conducting market assessment surveys  creating business development and market access strategies  preparing detailed project reports  benchmarking and assuring quality  and assisting with recruitments and procurements. further  productivity support could come from individuals or consultants  offering guidance to geographically concentrated groups of enterprises  as well as easily customizable  smartphone based inventory  procurement  and human resource management software. entrepreneurs could offer these software services commercially through a freemium services model  with a subsidized basic version.in india  it may be tempting to view business productivity services and agricultural extension services similarly and thereby offer the services through public officials. however  this is unlikely to be effective  as public officials do not possess the required level of expertise and government agencies do not have the same profit motive as private providers a motive that leads the latter to constantly upgrade their services and expertise.let go of the anti big biasthe implementation of any reform is likely to remain suboptimal without a paradigm shift in the way the indian state views and engages with the private sector. instead of taking an adversarial and regulatory oriented approach  it needs to highlight partnership and facilitation. the anti big bias reflected in the government and public policy is a problem that has yet to be tackled effectively.the economic survey of india           contains a rigorous discussion on india s demographic dividend and how it could be harnessed to benefit the country. however  this will only be feasible if youth have the right education and skills and are either entrepreneurial or earn their living through formal employment. though jobs are typically created as firms grow in size  the productivity of thirty five year old firms in india have merely doubled  while their headcounts have fallen by a fourth. since this is neither normal nor healthy  economists and policymakers have attempted to examine the causes of these issues. they have found that labor laws  rules and regulations  and the cost of hiring and maintaining permanent workers in every sector matter and often encourage or condemn firms to remain small in size  see table   .table    government incentives that disincentivise growththe survey notes  schemes and interventions based on tightly defined classifications create an incentive structure that might prevent firms from growing. service tax exemptions for firms with less than rs    lakh    million rupees  revenue and exemption from central excise duty for firms with an annual turnover of less than rs  .  crore     million rupees  are examples of these schemes.in       the newly constituted national institution for transforming india aayog  a government established policy think tank  developed this theme in its latest enterprise survey on the ease of doing business in india. the survey found that firms with     or more employees took significantly longer to get necessary approvals  confronted more regulatory obstacles  and faced higher compliance costs than smaller firms. for firms employing more than ten people  tax regulations and environmental clearances were bigger obstacles  which made it harder for them to grow in size.india s smaller factory sizes are also a big deterrent  particularly in fulfilling export orders. a typical textile factory in india employs     people  whereas a factory in bangladesh has     people. in       the textile commissioner of india stated that india s textile industry would grow from its current size of      billion to      billion  about   .  trillion to   .  trillion rupees  in two years. it is pertinent to note here that only two textile firms  alok industries and arvind  are large in size  as the former had a turnover of a little under    billion      billion rupees  and the latter had a turnover of around      million     billion rupees  in the           financial year. this is in stark contrast to the it industry  where billion dollar firms are numerous.gursharan bhue  nagpurnanand prabhala  and prasanna tantri point out that firms are willing to forgo growth in order to retain their access to finances.    that is  when certain easier financing access is provided to firms below a certain threshold  say  sme firms   they prefer to forgo growth opportunities that would allow them to cross this threshold   firms that near the threshold for qualification slow down their investments in plant and machinery  other capital expenditure  and experience slower growth in manufacturing activity and output.     the authors also point out that when banks are put under pressure to lend to micro  small  and medium enterprises  they fear the fallout of not meeting those lending targets and consequently encourage their borrowers to stay small.as a potential solution to these issues  bhue  prabhala  and tantri also suggest removing the conditions that make directed lending to small enterprises necessary. that is  if informational  administrative  and monitoring costs are lowered  banks might be willing to lend to small enterprises and not feel pressured to prevent their growth. however  another potential solution may be to slowly phase these firms out of this financing system so that they do not conspire to remain small and forgo opportunities to grow.conclusioninternational evidence and the current state of affairs in india with regard to the size of commercial businesses  average number of employees  suggest that government policies on msmes must become more nuanced. these policies must take into account the central role that new and smaller enterprises  established by educated entrepreneurs  play in productive job creation.informal micro enterprises  and single person enterprises run by those lacking in formal education  should be termed as subsistence enterprises. the government would then be obligated to support them with basic public goods  including education  and a robust social safety net. educating the next generation is critical to breaking the iron grip of poverty and pulling single person enterprises out of survival mode. however  support for these subsistence enterprises should be provided under anti poverty measures and not under economic development  much less under productive job creating measures .to create these conditions and generate employment and economic development  policy interventions have to change. in general  the government s perception of entrepreneurship as a viable and sustainable solution to the lack of employment is well founded. international evidence is supportive of this start ups and young firms create more jobs  regardless of their size  and educated entrepreneurs have a far higher probability of success in starting and growing formal businesses. therefore  public policy to support entrepreneurship and msmes should target these entrepreneurs. however  any government support should be made contingent on the enterprise s progress in creating jobs and productive growth  thereby encouraging more dynamic entrepreneurship.india s job creation strategy should focus on three efforts. first  it should promote the creation of formal businesses by easing the barriers to business incorporation. second  it should support new businesses during their initial  vulnerable years with policies that help them find their feet and expand. third  it should include reviewing and modifying policy measures that may impede small and medium businesses from scaling up.venkatraman anantha nageswaran is the dean of the ifmr graduate school of business  krea university  tamil nadu .gulzar natarajan joined the indian administrative service in      and is currently seniormanaging director at the global innovation fund.this is an edited excerpt from the authors  working paper  india s quest for jobs  a policy agenda  published by carnegie india. read the full paper here.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




desperate to move fast and break things  modi acts first and thinks later
text size  a  a the narendra modi government announces a policy for transition to electric vehicles and then realises it is unrealistic. it extends the deadline  which will no doubt be extended again.in a huff  the government says single use plastic will be banned across the country in a matter of weeks  only to realise it is just impractical to do so.if you think these are isolated examples  just look at the first budget of the second modi government  most of its big bad ideas have been rolled back. in the budget  the government said it would super tax the super rich. under pressure from india inc a few weeks later  it had to cut corporate tax. soon it will realise that this is not what it needed to do since the main problem is lack of demand. then  it will do something else.until now  the modi government has only been accused of implementation paralysis  but the days of policy paralysis may not be far. policy paralysis occurs when the government is too afraid to make any new policy move  fearing it will backfire. the modi government has already slowed down a thriving economy with its compulsive need for disruption  and can t afford to impose any more disruption  or so one hopes .also read  bharat petroleum sale will make modi india s no.   reformer. but reform by stealth won t domedicine without diagnosisthe root of the problem lies in making policy without evidence or a causal link. sometimes there s a political motive or a vested interest in doing so  sometimes it s not even that.having dismantled the state of jammu   kashmir without any due process  using the governor s stamp after keeping the j k assembly under suspension  the government decides to find reasons. article      it says  was coming in the way of development and fighting terrorism. there is absolutely no evidence of this. worse  the government doesn t feel the need to give any evidence. no study  no commission of inquiry  no consultation  no nothing. how does it matter that article     may actually have helped in the  development  of j k we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowsimilarly  the government first announced the rebuilding of the central vista  the iconic heart of new delhi  and then went around finding reasons. there s congestion  there s the threat of earthquake  there s this  there s that  again  no study  no evidence.fear of contrary evidencethe modi government is sometimes so afraid of evidence based policy making that it decides to bury the evidence. in may this year  the union health ministry put a stop on publishing or even discussing any research regarding e cigarettes by any government affiliated institute. the government had already decided it was going to ban e cigarettes  having already issued an advisory against them in august     . now  it didn t want any research saying they were safer than cigarettes.not even the tobacco control division of the ministry of health   family welfare cared to carry out any study or usage survey on e cigarettes. when the result is pre decided  why waste time with research  there was just one government sponsored study  which conducted no original research  and conveniently ignored growing research that showed regulated use of e cigarettes can actually help people quit smoking.the ministry had set up a sub committee to look into the issue in       and an rti accessed file noting showed a bureaucrat s remark   the issue does not appear to have proceeded in a scientific and objective manner. we should arrive at a decision after thorough consideration  especially of the contrarian view .also read  why the clamour to ban e cigarettes in india when cigarettes and beedis are allowed the high cost of policy without evidencemaking policy without research and evidence  without establishing a causal link  comes at a high cost. e cigarettes will now flourish in the grey market  without regulation. in the absence of regulation  people won t even know what exactly they are inhaling. those who want to quit smoking real cigarettes no longer have the e cigarette option.similarly  the government s flip flops on the electric vehicle  ev  policy have contributed to uncertainly in the auto sector  and regulatory uncertainty is the enemy of investment. the flip flop over the ev policy has contributed to the slowdown in the auto sector  perhaps resulting in job losses too.india will achieve     per cent electric mobility by       we were told in          meaning diesel and petrol vehicles won t be sold from     . this caused panic among manufacturers of fossil fuel based vehicles and cheer among those looking to sell electric vehicles. but soon  the government realised the deadline was impractical and now it has decided not to formulate a promised ev policy. it realised it has to start with creating a charging infrastructure first so it has now drafted a charging policy. how soon before that is also changed  throwing many investment plans out of play in every such case  the government s objective is not to achieve good long term results but positivity inducing short term headlines.  india to go fully ev by      . three cheers. when the policy is withdrawn  there are other sexy headlines to replace them   india to ban single use plastic on mahatma gandhi s birthday . fantastic  then  that is also withdrawn without a whimper.this headline management is grievous for the economy. there can t be a better example of it than modi s biggest policy blunders  demonetisation and gst. both were so ill thought out that the government kept issuing circulars  amendments  ordinances and amended rules for weeks. if the government had cared for evidence based policy making  it would have rolled out gst slowly  testing its implementation.research is a western conceptif the government understood causality  it would have known that hoarded cash accounts for just   per cent of the black economy  and demonetisation was not worth the pain. of course  the government didn t carry out any study on the impact of demonetisation.the government can get away with making and unmaking policy based on its whims and fancies because the opposition is too weak to question it. coming soon  the government says it will prepare a national register of indian citizens  asking all indians to prove their citizenship. for such a draconian move you d think it would first show evidence that india is over run with illegal immigrants. but it doesn t need to  it already has a brute majority. besides  research is a western concept  and causality is an anti hindu idea.also read  why indian economic tiger became puppy with tail between legs   what markets want modi to doviews are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




bharat petroleum sale will make modi india s no.   reformer. but reform by stealth won t do
text size  a  a the planned privatisation of bharat petroleum corporation limited  bpcl  will establish narendra modi as india s most reformist prime minister. thus far  only narasimha rao and atal bihari vajpayee were given due recognition as reformers   the former for ending the licence permit raj in       and the latter for beginning the process of privatisation of public sector behemoths.modi has actually done more reforms than any previous prime minister   especially reforms not prompted by economic crisis   but the lack of genuine privatisation under his watch has been seen as an unwillingness to let go of the belief that the public sector is somehow the crown jewels. now  modi has himself busted this myth.in       the supreme court blocked vajpayee s privatisation moves on the ground that companies nationalised through an act of parliament cannot be privatised without repealing those acts. this stymied his bid to privatise bpcl and hindustan petroleum  since any such move would have needed a parliamentary nod   which was not forthcoming.also read  why indian economic tiger became puppy with tail between legs   what markets want modi to dogiven the usual political uproar that accompanies any effort to bring in denationalisation legislation  the privatisation of bpcl was always going to be a tough ask. but  almost unnoticed  the modi government had quietly slipped in the repeal of the burmah shell nationalisation law by bundling it with a  repealing and amending act of       that had annulled      obsolete and redundant laws lying unnecessarily on the statue book  sic    says a mint report quoting a senior government official. these  obsolete and redundant laws  included the act that had nationalised burmah shell  the former avatar of bpcl before nationalisation.this is reform by stealth. if the repeal act had been brought in as a separate piece of legislation  it would have caught the attention of the unions and political opponents of modi. it could even have faced a rajya sabha blackball  as did the amendments proposed to the land acquisition act in     .two things get established now.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowone  it would be wrong to label modi as someone who is basically against privatisation. if he could think of bpcl in       it hardly seems fair to say he was ideologically opposed to privatisation   something this writer too has alluded too. wrongly  it seems.two  the bold privatisation of bpcl  if followed up by the privatisation of air india  will establish modi as india s biggest economic reformer  especially if we exclude narasimha rao s crisis driven liberalisation policies of        .however  it would help if modi were to now formally embrace reform as his credo  and start moving beyond reform by stealth. he needs to actively champion privatisation of non strategic businesses like banks and public sector behemoths which no longer serve any public purpose  like bharat sanchar nigam limited and mahanagar telephone nigam limited .also read  modi won t win in       unless these nine economic follies are reversedhe should also bring in private sector expertise and management skills in public sector units that may never be privatised for strategic reasons   like the top five public sector banks in india  or irctc  which recently made a blockbuster ipo that was oversubscribed     times  or some defence units. the logical way to build strategic capabilities while retaining public control in critical sectors is to privatise management  but not shareholding.the ultimate goal of public shareholdings should be the preservation of public wealth  and not frittering it away by running these enterprises into the ground and offering repeated bailouts.this is modi s biggest task in his second tenure as pm.this article was first published in swarajya.jagannathan is editorial director  swarajya. he tweets at  thejaggi. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




loss of friend nepal   restive kashmir  modi s plate is full as he meets china s xi jinping
text size  a  a chinese president xi jinping won t have time to travel to pakistan during his visit to india and nepal this weekend  so pakistan prime minister imran khan decided to go to beijing.worse  pakistan army chief gen. qamar javed bajwa  clearly couldn t trust his pm to talk to the chinese leadership alone   so he flew into beijing one day before. the spokesperson of the armed forces  dg ispr gen. asif ghafoor tweeted coas arrived china on official visit. coas will meet chinese mil leadership including pla army commander  vice chairman of the central military commission   commander southern theater command. coas will also join pm for meeting with chinese pm and president.   dg ispr   officialdgispr  october        if the mountain won t come to muhammad  as goes the well known saying  then muhammad must go to the mountain.pm imran khan has said that he will raise the kashmir situation as well as the     billion china pakistan economic corridor  cpec   which is said to be losing steam because of pakistan s rising international debt.certainly  china has demonstrated considerable allegiance to its key client partner in south asia  by informally pushing the p  countries at the un security council in mid august to discuss kashmir.also read    key highlights of india s foreign policy that jaishankar amplified in the uswe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowkashmir issue  beneficiary beijingbut a chinese foreign ministry spokesperson  aware that president xi is travelling to mamallapuram  tamil nadu  for a second informal summit with prime minister narendra modi this week  recently said that kashmir won t be a  major issue  between the two sides.china realises better than anyone else that india may be caught in double jeopardy of its own making if new delhi doesn t fix the kashmir lockdown issue soon. hobbled by low economic growth is one thing  but how do you tell the rest of south asia that you are its natural leader by virtue of your size  population and natural resources if you can t control your restive regions note that china  satisfied with pakistan s de facto clientitis  is now turning serious attention to other parts of south asia. as mohamed nasheed  maldives former president and current speaker of people s majlis  parliament   said in an interview with theprint  the chinese are worse than the east india company because they end up owning land by offering huge loans  then exchange the failure to pay with equity.also read  before xi jinping meets modi  indian army raises the cost with him vijay exercisenepal s slide towards chinaso  in mid september in kathmandu   xi jinping thought on socialism with chinese characteristics for a new era  arrived in the form of a two day symposium  attended by none other than nepalese prime minister k.p. oli.the symposium was jointly organised by oli s nepal communist party  ncp  and the communist party of china  cpc  s central party school  organisation department and international liaison department   the same people that a delegation of bjp leaders met when they visited china in august and told them that the bjp s membership had overtaken cpc rolls.the ncp s school department deputy chief beduram bhusal told the  himalayan times  that the  chinese side has proposed to share its experience in running the party and the government   and that the nepalese would also be doing the same.in the wake of nepal s      economic blockade by madhesi political parties in the terai region  which was informally supported by delhi  kathmandu s upper caste elite struck back. nepal s communist parties came together under the leadership of oli  won the elections and proceeded to tilt towards beijing.during a visit to beijing last year  oli told the kathmandu post that  there was a lot to learn from china s controlled and favourable society. china s successful development path  oli was quoted by south china morning post as saying  provides a  new choice  for developing countries like nepal.oli  clearly  seems pleased that he is being courted so strenuously by beijing. after all  the cold shoulder he has received in delhi  where he is perceived as pro chinese   which seems to have become a self fulfilling prophecy   the wining and dining by the chinese is decidedly more attractive.that s why xi jinping s visit to nepal  the first by a chinese head of state since deng xiaoping in       indicates just how much the chinese are setting store by its himalayan neighbour. kathmandu hopes for a large aid package  especially in the development of hydropower as well as infrastructure connectivity over the himalayas  such as the   .  billion trans himalayan railway project between kathmandu and kyirong in tibet.also read  modi will always have houston   india  a changed relationship with the usdelhi losing kathmanduis delhi fuming  has india lost nepal  asking the old questions will  inevitably  yield the same old answers. yes. and  yes.but if the question is asked differently  as to why india  loses  nepal so often  and repeatedly  then delhi may come up with some new answers. first of all  the india nepal relationship misses the warmth of former external affairs minister sushma swaraj  whose invocation of the  roti beti rishta  between the two countries never failed to guarantee a dose of extra warmth despite the chill in the relationship.modi  too  has won hearts and minds in nepal  even after the blockade. but the pm s warmth hasn t percolated down to the capital s bureaucratic classes which insist on doing business with its neighbours dominated by official talking points  power point presentations and memory cards.meanwhile  the chinese are flush with cash and delhi s demonetisation woes haven t subsided. modi s big feather in his cap  as he meets xi this weekend  is that us president donald trump is  at least for the moment  letting him have his say on kashmir.with the us backing him  pm modi can afford to play the perfect  cool host. what happens after mamallapuram will be the real story.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




before xi jinping meets modi  indian army raises the cost with him vijay exercise
text size  a  a if prime minister narendra modi s trip to china last year to meet president xi jinping in wuhan arrested the growing rift in bilateral relations after the doklam crisis  the respite has been limited and temporary. while the two leaders have successfully managed to avoid another flare up along the himalayan frontiers  neither beijing nor new delhi has been able to halt the growing divergences that characterise many aspects of the broader relationship.the informal meeting between xi jinping and modi in mamallapuram  tamil nadu has been announced  planned and scheduled   all informally  of course   but it is still not clear whether it will take place at all. the confirmation is yet to come. it is also not clear which side threw in the showstopper.but the mere fact that the meeting between two heads of government is still hanging in the air so close to its scheduled date already tells us more about the state of india china relations than what any official communique can or could have.also read  after kashmir  modi and xi could struggle to recreate  wuhan spirit  in mamallapuramlittle for xi to take homeeven if xi turns up in mamallapuram this weekend  other than the sublime temples and media spectacle  he will have little to take back with him.president xi has failed to enlist india in his favourite and most ambitious enterprises  new delhi steadfastly remains outside the belt and road initiative  is likely to limit the role of chinese telecom equipment manufacturers in its  g network rollout  and is the leading holdout in a big regional free trade arrangement. external affairs minister s. jaishankar put it as succinctly as possible in a media briefing marking the     days of the second modi government last month   bri rethink  the answer is no.  he reiterated this at last week s world economic forum event in new delhi.similarly  even if the us government weren t pressing new delhi to keep huawei out of its  g network rollout  influential voices within the country s own security and political establishment have been vocal about avoiding building a pervasive network using equipment manufactured by an opaque country with a history of offensive cyber operations and whose adversarial posture is increasingly open for all to see.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowindia remains on the fence on the regional comprehensive economic partnership  a proposed free trade agreement that includes most of the indo pacific economies. one of the biggest reasons for this is the concern that such an agreement will allow chinese manufacturers greater access to the indian market while indian manufacturers and services exporters will continue to face hurdles selling to china. as i ve argued elsewhere  china s information control and internet censorship regime is effectively a non tariff barrier.also read  as chennai readies for modi xi meet  ancient chinese links to tamil nadu surfacehim vijay  raising the red flagif the prospects for even modest success on his desired agenda are dim  xi jinping is scheduled to arrive in india at a time when the indian army is taking its new mountain combat capability through the paces in arunachal pradesh. of course  the exercise  him vijay  is taking place     km from the chinese boundary  but it s pretty obvious that the red team in this exercise is the chinese people s liberation army  pla . in any case  arunachal pradesh is a red rag to our red neighbour.little wonder that the chinese side raised this issue during a preparatory meeting last week.returning past favours during visitsi do not know if new delhi did it intentionally  but it is a good idea to raise xi s costs of participating in the informal summit. if xi comes to mamallapuram despite the small picking and some provocation  he will send a  costly signal  of the value china attaches to its relations with india. such a signal is the necessary condition for new delhi to be more accommodating of beijing s positions in political and trade negotiations. if he does not come  then it follows that new delhi should maintain hardline positions  and that china s indulgence of pakistan and its recent diplomatic activities over kashmir are the primary indicators of its india policy.as for military activities during official visits  china should be the last to complain. in       beijing tested a megaton nuclear weapon when then president r. venkataraman was on the first ever visit by an indian president to china. in       china conducted an anti satellite  asat  test when its foreign minister li zhaoxing was on an official visit to india. more recently  in       the pla carried out incursions in chumar and demchok even as xi was swinging with modi in a jhoola in ahmedabad. if china claims its pattern of effrontery during high level visits is innocent  then well  so is the indian army s exercise  him vijay.it is in india s interests to have stable  amicable and mutually prosperous relations with china   yet  they cannot be achieved for the asking. cooperation has to evolve. the mamallapuram summit is a good indicator of how well we are doing on that front  whether it happens or not.the author is the director of the takshashila institution  an independent centre for research and education in public policy. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




communist party of china has a solution for india s opposition that modi shah won t mind
text size  a  a the communist party of china  cpc  is curious about the rise of the bharatiya janata party in india. chinese leaders were  shocked  to know how the bjp trumped the cpc to become the largest party in the world. the bjp s organisational heft in elections amazes them.what they may not know is how bjp led india  the world s largest democracy  has a real chance of achieving through elections what they enforced through coercion and repression in china   the  multi party cooperation   a misnomer for one party rule.in the chinese political system  the cpc is the sole ruling authority but eight  non communist  parties  cooperate  by participating in state affairs and giving policy inputs whenever and wherever required. these parties together have    lakh members  the cpc has nearly nine crore. it prevents  power rotation  and  nasty competition  among parties  chinese president xi jinping said last year. he is trying to re brand it as a  new type of party system    different from the western model but more in sync with the chinese adage  only your feet know whether your shoes fit well .also read  amit shah raises questions about india s multi party democracyparty politics  made in chinaas china seeks to justify its authoritarian political system  india is witnessing a debate on its own. an    member bjp delegation was in china for a week in august september on the cpc s invitation. a couple of weeks after they returned  bjp president amit shah raised questions about the political system india has adopted.  after    years of independence  a question was arising in everybody s mind whether our multi party parliamentary democratic system has failed  whether the  system would be able to achieve our goals  would make a bharat that our constitution makers had envisaged   he said on    september.this debate has started when the indian polity is witnessing a voluntary multi party cooperation and the melting away of the opposition parties even though they are putting up a valiant fight on twitter. prime minister narendra modi tells bangladeshi prime minister sheikh hasina  not to worry  about the national register of citizens  nrc  even as home minister amit shah vows to drive out  termites   his nomenclature for bangladeshi infiltrators .so  if modi has no plans to send them back to bangladesh  is he planning to keep them in detention centres refugee camps  there are no opposition leaders to ask this   not beyond sundry press conferences. a powerful bjp functionary told this writer the other day in kolkata   don t you bother about what happens to them. we have to first identify them.  pressed further  he added in exasperation   they will be disenfranchised first  then made ineligible for all government schemes  civic amenities . let them work as manual labourers.  that s the bjp s plan for  infiltrators   whose numbers it estimates to be at least two crore.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  is lalu son a bjp ally  tejashwi yadav s tirade against nitish raises question in rjdindian opposition s voluntary cooperationbarring some noises from west bengal chief minister mamata banerjee and a few pressers and tv bytes by others  there is no opposition worth the name to communal nrc politics. how many opposition leaders did you hear protesting when the enforcement directorate decided to register a case against veteran politician sharad pawar  timed on the eve of maharashtra assembly elections  did you hear any noise from any non congress leader   or from even most congress leaders   when central investigation agencies went after p. chidambaram or d.k. shivakumar  these politicians may not be paragons of virtue and innocence but similar moves by central agencies in the past used to draw huge opposition outrage in solidarity.so where are the opposition leaders  well  most of them have chosen to  cooperate  with the bjp  not going beyond token protests or criticism and siding with it when needed. see how quickly andhra pradesh chief minister jagan mohan reddy has forgotten about his once vociferous demand for special status for his state.many political pundits would stammer and fumble if they were to face rapid fire questions today  is telangana rashtra samithi  trs  a part of the bjp led nda  naveen patnaik s biju janata dal  bjd  is an ally of the bjp  isn t it  do mayawati of bahujan samaj party and akhilesh yadav of the samajwadi party provide outside support to the nda at the centre  the way they once did for the congress led upa  has the son of jailed rjd leader lalu prasad  the former bihar deputy cm tejashwi yadav  given his word to the bjp that he would be a good boy also read  democracy devouring itself  people too stupid to sustain it   academic paper creates furorecongress resigned to fatethe congress may still be holding out against the bjp  but the principal opposition party is fast becoming a social media entity  with party activities mostly confined to cyberspace. the implosions in the congress seem inexorable. speak to any of its leader in poll bound maharashtra or haryana and you will be flummoxed by their confidence level   we will do better than what rahul gandhi did in lok sabha elections. bjp leaders think we won t get the post of the leader of the opposition  which requires winning at least    per cent of the total seats in the assembly . we will prove them wrong. the congress today looks resigned to fate and at the mercy of the bjp   in case it has any role in the multi party cooperation model. there are a few opposition leaders such as tmc chief mamata banerjee and dmk president m.k. stalin in distant corners who are putting up resistance but they are insignificant in the bjp s larger scheme of things.opposition parties in india are clueless today. modi has changed the game completely. they were used to playing snakes and ladders. put in a rugby game by modi shah  they are mortally scared. they would prefer to sit it out. it may be a risky strategy though. voters may not be excited about the snakes and ladders game again.no wonder  many opposition parties are now looking at the chinese multi party cooperation model to recoup and survive. sceptical about the multi party parliamentary democratic system  amit shah may not mind it  for    years of the bjp rule  so to say.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




amit shah vilifying bangladeshis while pm modi rolls out the red carpet for sheikh hasina
text size  a  a as the kashmir valley marks two months of its lockdown  with journalists protesting at the srinagar press club and political leaders still under detention  prime minister narendra modi s focus now is on how to best govern the soon to be union territory.in his cabinet meetings  sources say  modi talked about dredging the dal lake in srinagar and returning it to its pristine shape and size. remember the photo of the pm sailing away into the blue waters of dal lake when he visited kashmir earlier this year well  none other than former jammu and kashmir governor n.n. vohra had sent out an sos to the indian navy in      to help with the dal lake  whose size has come down from    sq km to    sq km because of untreated sewage and pollution.modi seems to be deeply concerned with improving the lives of kashmiris. he has the support of a vast majority of kashmiris who are quite fed up with the dynastic rule of the abdullahs and the muftis   problem is  that it s difficult to build political leadership when you have incarcerated everyone  even if reports now state that leaders in the valley will soon be released on a  case by case  basis.this is the remarkable thing about modi. on the one hand  he has tweeted fulsome praise for the vande bharat express  a  navratri gift for my brothers and sisters in jammu as well as devotees of maa vaishno devi   because the people of j k must benefit from governance largesse.on the other hand  he has delegated political control of lockdown j k to home minister amit shah  while security issues are managed by national security adviser ajit doval.also read  modi s international activism apart  india s new govt will have foreign policy challengeswe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowenter sheikh hasinabut something else has been happening in delhi this week  and briefly on thursday evening  as the wind  rain and storm lashed delhi  a curtain briefly parted at the bangladesh high commission. prime minister sheikh hasina was in town and in the sanctum sanctorum of her dining room there were a few very special guests over for dinner.there was ram madhav  the powerful bjp general secretary in charge of the northeast  tathagata roy  the outspoken governor of tripura  biplab deb  the chief minister of tripura  ghulam nabi azad  senior congress leader  hasina s powerful international affairs adviser gowher rizvi  bangladesh s high commissioner to india muazzem ali. and at the head of the table  hasina herself.hasina had a very congenial meeting with modi in new york last week at the margins of the un general assembly and is meeting him in delhi too. modi has told hasina that the national register of citizens  nrc  is an  internal matter  and that she needn t worry too much about it.bangladeshis also don t seem that concerned over amit shah s remarks in the run up to the elections that all bangladeshi infiltrators will be thrown into the bay of bengal like  deemak   termites . the bangladeshis  comfortable in the widespread acknowledgement that their growth rates are the highest in asia  are putting shah s comments down to election rhetoric. moreover  most on the nrc assam list  ironically  are hindus not muslims.but what happens when shah repeats his inflammatory statements across the country  especially in west bengal  it worries not just the bengal bjp  as this article in theprint shows  but it may also begin to concern the prime minister.also read  bangladesh is booming and here s why   pm sheikh hasina explainsrise of rajnathenter defence minister rajnath singh  also a former president of the bjp. over the last week  rajnath has been playing his protector of the nation role to the hilt. he will fly a rafale sortie in paris in the coming week   on dussehra  no less   where he is going to receive the first batch of rafales  he has fired a medium machine gun onboard ins vikramaditya and flown the indigenously built light combat aircraft tejas.is rajnath singh being propped up as a counter to amit shah  bjp sources pooh pooh the very thought  but in any delhi durbar  signals are everything. the mild mannered rajnath singh was very quiet during the first modi tenure  but in recent weeks has acquired a much more active social media handle.  he s still not as good as the pm  though. modi knows and hasina knows that there s no question of throwing even one bangladeshi out of the country   in any case  hasina believes there are none. can amit shah seriously carry a campaign of vilifying bangladeshis across the country when his own prime minister wants a better relationship with bangladesh subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




kartarpur invite to manmohan singh will only help modi push his hardline pakistan policy
text size  a  a pakistan has set the diplomatic cat among the pigeons by deciding to invite former prime minister manmohan singh to the inaugural ceremony of the corridor that will connect the darbar sahib shrine in kartarpur with india s dera baba nanak in gurdaspur district  on   november.it is unlikely that manmohan singh will go. he is a former prime minister and protocol  that bane of all imagination  will prohibit him from stepping foot on pakistani soil. moreover  the sophisticated congressman that he is  singh will never allow the narendra modi government to even think of pointing an accusing finger at him by visiting a country new delhi seems to be at war with.also read  why modi govt has erased a    year old unofficial blacklist of sikh foreign nationalsmanmohan singh s foreign policysingh s second government was lost over the perception of pervasive corruption  but just look at his decade in foreign policy terms   and compare it with modi s so far.as kashmir is set to enter the   th day of its lockdown  it may be worthwhile to remember that manmohan singh nearly pulled off the unimaginable in late      early      by thinking up a four point formula with former pakistan president general musharraf. this would have allowed kashmiris from both sides to cross the line of control and create conducive conditions  over time  for a joint management of the region.just for one second  imagine if that had happened.if  in          manmohan singh had actually been able to cross that border sealed in blood  from where he walked over to this side in       and visit gah in chakwal district   where the musharraf government had allowed teri to light up the streets of his village  given the school in which he had studied an extra lick of paint  and pulled out the records of his student years.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowtruth is  manmohan singh became the  sutradhar  of cross border hope and harmony that atal bihari vajpayee bequeathed to him when he lost power. singh carried that message further by also contemplating a  mountain of peace  that siachen could become.today s india seems to have erased the idea of those possibilities. as india celebrates     years of mahatma gandhi s birth anniversary  the kashmiris are practising what the mahatma taught the subcontinent  a civil curfew in which parents don t send children to school  shop keepers don t open their shops and the valley is simply shut down.it is fascinating that khyber pakhtunkhwa  where khan abdul ghaffar khan once converted his blink and shoot pashtun comrades into living the gandhian idea of non violence  now has a full grown movement that is rooted in the same principles. the pashtun tahafuz movement s cry   da sang azaadi da   what kind of freedom is this    has been reverberating across the pakistani landscape  demanding accountability for missing families.also read  on manmohan singh s birthday    reforms from his      roadmap that changed indiamodi   post pragmatic worldcertainly  the pakistani invite to manmohan singh is charged with the cleverness the pakistani state believes it can constantly get away with. another example of the pakistan army isi s increasing influence over imran khan is the sudden sacking of maleeha lodhi as pakistan s representative at the un and replacing her with munir akram  who has a penchant for loose nuclear talk and bashing up his girlfriend.that s the problem with pakistan. imran khan s diminishing control over the levers of power perfectly segues into modi s hardline pakistan policy. external affairs minister s. jaishankar  whose ability to sell coal to newcastle has been manifest all week in new york  has just told news agency pti that it would be wrong to misinterpret modi s  abki baar trump sarkar  as a pro trump slogan.meaning  modi is endorsing trump because new delhi believes that he s coming back to power and the impeachment challenge is hardly worth the ink in the nib  and even if the democrats topple trump in next year s us elections  new delhi would be equally happy in reaching out to whoever it is and saying   agli baar joe biden elizabeth warren sarkar. in jaishankar s post pragmatic world   a world that modi loves   everything has a price and what you say today can easily be discounted tomorrow. that is why modi warmly shook hands with iranian leader hassan rouhani in new york  days after swearing undying friendship with trump   after all  trump was also sharing sweet nothings with imran khan  knowing fully well that he needs him to honourably get out of afghanistan.that is why modi will warmly shake hands with chinese president xi jinping when he comes later this month. and remember  when the pm promises no dialogue with pakistan until the end of cross border terrorism  cbt   it is just an instrument for diplomatic negotiation.so  the next big question  who will modi ji send for the inaugural kartarpur sahib corridor ceremony in pakistan on   november also read  imran khan was right. modi did resolve the kashmir issue once and for all  reham khansubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




teargassed  restricted  alienated   stop saying shias in kashmir are on modi govt s side
text size  a  a there is a new  inspired  narrative being built around the shia community in kashmir  especially after the abrogation of article      as though they are supportive of new delhi s action. a recent article by abhijit iyer mitra says that the  shias of kashmir live in a state of relief and caution  relief at article     being lifted  and caution that things won t get any better for them .he writes about  cooperative stone pelting  alluding to a tacit understanding between the shias and the security establishment. a crpf told mitra   they tell us the time they will come out to pelt so it never gets serious.  nothing could be more untrue.this mythology of cooperation doesn t quite explain how scores of shia mourners were injured when many muharram processions turned violent on      and    of september. the security forces teargassed the shia procession and shot pellet guns. is this  cooperation  also read  after scrapping of article      shias in kashmir are in a state of relief and cautionmuharram processionsto understand the shia narrative about the scrapping of article     and the overall kashmir conflict  let s take a closer look at the community. a common sight in almost all the shia muslim localities of kashmir include these signs and images  kullu yawmin  ashura  wa kullu arzin karbala  every day is ashura and every land is karbala    portraits of iranian supreme leader ali hosseini khamenei  ruhollah khomeini  former iranian president ahmadinejad and hassan nasrallah  the founder of lebanese hezbollah with an ak   .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthere are more iranian symbols than indian or pakistani in shia localities. after the scrapping of article     on   august  shias put up more and more such banners  portraits  flags on houses  mosques  imambaras  walls.the commemoration of the  th century battle of karbala in which prophet mohammad s grandson imam hussain was killed along with his    kith and kin is a deeply ingrained event among shia muslims. however  muharram processions were banned in the valley after armed rebellion erupted in kashmir in     . since then  the shia community takes out processions in government designated routes in srinagar  within the limits of certain localities. but after   august  most of the muharram processions were not allowed. these processions is the manifestation of our resilience against cruelty   a senior shia preacher told me.hussain  a journalist from budgam  said the government imposed a curfew on   september and sealed all the entries and exits of the town.  the resilience that we learned from karbala made us leave our houses and commemorate the martyrdom of imam hussain   he said.also read  kashmir photojournalist hit with pellets    others hurt while covering muharram processionalienationthe shias of kashmir are not welcoming the article     move either. if the centre wanted to take any decisions in kashmir s favour  then why won t they take us onboard for the decision  how can we trust any decision based on lies and treachery  it s the same as karbala in kashmir   a    year old businessman  parvaiz ahmad  from zadibal told me.in sufipora  people mostly work in the tourism industry. they work as porters  in hotels and restaurants in the nearby pahalgam hill station. before   august  we were fighting against elite families of kashmir  the hoteliers  who have taken the forest land illegally and are making thousands of rupees out of it. now we will have even stronger people establishing businesses and eroding our ecosystem   zulfqar sheikh  a college student in sufipora  said. the government s move now allows others to buy land in kashmir.a senior shia preacher from pulwama told me that people have voted for different political parties earlier but any political activity has  ended in smoke  after   august.  no one can shoulder the mess the bjp has created in kashmir.  this move has further alienated a common kashmiri irrespective of their religion and sect   a university student from pulwama said.jinnah to netanyahukashmiri shias are considered to be supporters of pakistan because of mohammad ali jinnah s ismaeli shia roots. he is still revered among shias of kashmir. according to some  shia muslims had supported the  other side  during the         and      raids by pakistan.however  after zia ul haq led pakistan groomed and protected anti shia factions  the shias of kashmir started developing a soft corner for india. saudi and us support for zia s regime against the soviets in afghanistan  consistent attacks on shias in pakistan made them anxious.at the same time  the      iranian revolution and the indian recognition of the new regime also garnered india some support from the shias. now  india s close ties to israel  remember benjamin netanyahu and modi s hugs  and us sanctions on oil from iran has again changed the dynamics in kashmir. the new india israel relationship hasn t made the shias feel very fond of india  or made them do  cooperative stone pelting .also read  modi has convinced the world kashmir is india s internal affair   but they re still watchingbjp s targets in kashmirinterestingly  the bjp tried to make inroads into the shia muslim vote bank  before and after the party broke away from the pdp coalition government last year.ram madhav even tried to lure shia voters in kashmir by making promises like minority status to shias  job reservations  demarcating a constituency  lifting ban on muharram processions  a separate shia waqf board and exclusive hajj quota for the community. but it didn t work.as of now  all the three major leaders of shias   imran raza ansari  mainstream   abbas ansari  separatist  and agha syed hassan  separatist    are under house arrest.so  don t try and use shias to polarise readers about what is really happening in kashmir.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




to use or not use modi s face against kejriwal in delhi polls. bjp can t decide
text size  a  a the bharatiya janata party is sitting on an awkward dilemma ahead of next year s assembly polls in delhi. and that is delaying its strategy. this  even as its main competitor the aam aadmi party and its chief arvind kejriwal have actively and visibly started to announce a slew of freebies and launch ubiquitous advertising campaigns.to take on brand arvind kejriwal  the bjp knows it needs a heavyweight   something it lacks in delhi. but if it were to fight the polls entirely on narendra modi s image  as it has done in many crucial state elections  it exposes the invincible prime minister to the vulnerability of losing in a direct modi kejriwal contest.given the current politically unstable state of the congress   which ruled the national capital for three straight terms before the aam aadmi party  aap    the bjp knows it is only kejriwal who poses the big challenge. but the party   known for its well oiled election machinery and before time preparedness   seems to be in two minds about what approach to take in delhi in     .also read  delhi govt ties up with harvard  world bank to study impact of free bus rides for womenbjp s conundrumin the      delhi assembly polls  the bjp took an atypical gamble by fielding former indian police service officer kiran bedi as the party s chief ministerial candidate.the decision was a colossal disaster   and led to an unequivocal sweep for the aap and a rout for other parties.many in the party later realised that modi s popularity could have helped salvage the lost opportunity to some extent  especially considering how the bjp has since performed in states where it fought entirely in modi s name   uttar pradesh and tripura being the most notable ones.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin       the bjp did well in delhi s municipal corporation elections when modi s face was plastered over all its campaigns.moreover  modi is far stronger and more loved now than he was five years ago when delhi elections were held. and in these last five years  kejriwal s sheen has somewhat waned.also read  how kejriwal s aap moved from  politics of change  to counting on religion to win voterskejriwal s powerusing modi in delhi is easier than it sounds. kejriwal has belligerently and consistently challenged the prime minister  an attempt to punch above his weight of just being a chief minister and still project himself as an opposition leader who can match up to modi.remember what can only be described as an amusing outburst calling pm modi a  coward and psychopath  on twitter modi is a coward and a psycopath   arvind kejriwal   arvindkejriwal  december         or remember his several run ins with the modi government over division of powers between delhi and the centre  a virulent tendency that he seems to have now temporarily put on hold ever since the bjp s stunning performance in this year s lok sabha elections.moreover  kejriwal is no rahul gandhi. he will put up more than just a fight in the elections  on the basis of flaunting his five year record  announcing freebies  engaging in refreshing brand of street politics and hold over crucial constituencies. the bjp knows the delhi elections might not be a walkover for modi and even the possibility of losing in a straight fight with kejriwal can be a huge embarrassment to him  causing a dent in his teflon coated image and giving the delhi chief minister a serious reason to gloat and shine.delhi isn t going to be like uttar pradesh  where it was modi versus a gathbandhan that he sought to portray as one that came together only to bring him down. it also won t be like tripura  where modi was trying to dismantle a decades old regime in a state where the bjp has no base. in fact  it won t even be like west bengal in      where the  mamata banerjee versus narendra modi  fight still gives the latter more room to justify not winning  given it is a state where the bjp has never ever held ground.merely making a good attempt against kejriwal won t be enough. he isn t any naamdar  entitled dynast . he also isn t perceived to be corrupt. both modi and kejriwal have risen on their own and built their politics as well as popularity through their unique approach. so  losing to kejriwal would mean modi has been decisively defeated by someone who is absolutely on the same level  but has just managed to play the game better.also read  ahead of delhi polls  cm kejriwal announces odd even traffic regulations from november     lack of optionsbesides other bottlenecks  the bjp also has fewer faces  if any  in delhi.union minister harsh vardhan  who is a member of parliament from the chandni chowk lok sabha constituency  had failed to deliver a decisive win as the bjp s chief ministerial face in the      polls. he is affable  but hardly the mass leader the bjp needs to counter kejriwal.delhi bjp chief manoj tiwari is all colourful and newsy  with a strong poorvanchali vote base  but little else. it s other delhi mps   like meenakshi lekhi who may have done well for herself by defeating congress bigwig ajay maken  but has little else going for her.former delhi bjp president satish upadhyay is also a lightweight in the current context.delhi is no rajasthan  or madhya pradesh  chhattisgarh  maharashtra or haryana  where the bjp has powerful regional leaders it can count on. in the national capital  modi seems to be the bjp s best bet. and yet paradoxically  it is modi who could end up exposing its biggest weakness if kejriwal manages to trounce the unconquerable prime minister.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




sharad pawar can t be caged by ed probe. that s why he is modi s guru  sonia s trusted ally
text size  a  a sharad govindrao pawar  the president of nationalist congress party  is the political equivalent of legendary magician harry houdini. the hungarian born american artist could leave even the most rational and sceptical ones in his audience surprised. it may seem unfair  and perhaps even a bit absurd  to compare the illusionist with the machiavellian politician. but their ability to overcome all odds far outweigh the differences between them.if houdini displayed magnificent skill in moments of crisis  emerging unscathed from the dangerous traps he set for himself  sharad pawar has shown what being the fulcrum of a state s politics for more than five decades looks like.a guru and an allysharad pawar is positively seen as the  godfather  of maharashtra s politics  and has perhaps got reliable friends more in the opposition than in the congress  the party he initially owed allegiance to. he has also closely interacted with the bjp and the rss. at a function in       prime minister narendra modi had heaped lavish praise on him.  i have no hesitation in accepting that  sharad  pawar held my hand and taught me to walk in my early days in gujarat   modi had said.today  sharad pawar is congress president sonia gandhi s most trusted ally in maharashtra. he is the same man who had opposed her candidature for the prime ministership in      citing her  foreign  italian  origins . with p.a. sangma and tariq anwar  he formed the ncp that same year  after the three of them were expelled from the party. the  nationalist  or  rashtravadi  in the ncp s name was a direct  confrontational signal to the congress that was led by a  foreigner  or  videshi .despite their history  sonia gandhi and sharad pawar are on the same page today.what has given pawar s image a considerable boost is the enforcement directorate s recent act of booking him for money laundering in the maharashtra state cooperative bank case  less than a month before the state goes to polls on    october.the inquiry comes at a time when his party and ally congress are in deep trouble. the ncp s second  and third rung leaders and activists have defected to the bjp. but pawar has been able to turn the ed adversity into a wonderful opportunity for himself. playing the victim  he has campaigned all over the state with great enthusiasm and verve  and has made sonia gandhi  rahul gandhi and the entire state congress leadership back him in his fight. the congress seems more dependent on pawar for the upcoming election than it is on its own leadership.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe noweven sanjay raut  shiv sena leader and his political nemesis  has come out in his support  saying that he sees the ed case  from the point of view of the next month s assembly elections. at the same time  speculations of  feud  in the pawar family that emerged after his nephew ajit pawar resigned from the assembly have been put to rest by ajit himself.  i was perturbed as i felt it was because of me that he had to face infamy at this age. hence  i decided to resign in keeping with my conscience. also read  in maharashtra s ed political potboiler  sharad pawar has the last laugha relentless fighterin       sharad pawar had campaigned while being under severe pain from oral cancer  for which he underwent     days of chemotherapy .  i would start work at   am  and at   pm i would go to the hospital. it s a battle. either you succeed  or you lose everything   he told historian patrick french in an interview years later.this relentlessness stems from how pawar  like houdini  performed in difficult circumstances at various stages in his political career  turning things in his favour most of the times.a protege of yashwantrao chavan  the first chief minister of maharashtra  pawar came into his own in     . at     he became the youngest chief minister of maharashtra  forming a coalition with the janata party.when the indira gandhi led congress returned to power in       pawar did not join the party and spent the next six years in political wilderness. his return to the centre stage began after he joined the congress again in     .in late       sharad pawar  chief minister at the time  found himself in deep trouble. the loyalists of rajiv gandhi  sitting in the opposition after losing the general election the previous year  had rebelled against pawar. it was being openly suggested that rajiv gandhi was behind the rebellion as he wanted pawar to go. but rajiv gandhi himself ended pawar s humiliating period by coming out in his support.a few months later  pawar was back to facing a challenging situation again. the congress had withdrawn support to the chandra shekhar government at the centre  and forced a general election. as the campaign was on  the nation was left shocked by rajiv gandhi s assassination. when the election results came out  the congress found itself in a position to form the government. sonia gandhi was approached by the congress working committee  which included sharad pawar and p.v. narasimha rao  to take charge of the party   and thus be the pm candidate. but she refused  citing family responsibilities.her decision meant that the contest was now between rao and pawar. rao eventually succeeded and pawar accepted the charge of defence minister. but the relationship between the two had soured. barely    months into his term  rao faced his biggest political challenge. riots broke out across the country following the demolition of babri masjid by the vishwa hindu parishad  vhp  led goons. mumbai was the worst affected and then maharashtra chief minister sudhakarrao naik was seen as incompetent to bring the situation under control.rao asked pawar to take charge of the state  which the latter s supporters initially believed to be the pm s plan to remove the maratha strongman from the central cabinet. within a week of pawar becoming the cm for the third time  mumbai suffered its worst terrorist attack on    march     . later that september  a major earthquake hit latur. pawar s political and administrative acumen made him rise to the occasion during both the crises.be it intra party rebellion  critical administrative scenarios  opposition allegations of scams   pawar has faced all. each time  his critics have believed the  pawar story  to be over. and each time  pawar has proved them wrong.also read  ahead of maharashtra polls  congress has given up  but sharad pawar s ncp still fightingfriends everywherepawar s greatest political strength has been his ability to mingle with people from all groups   writers  journalists  medical professionals to sportspersons and scientists. pawar was the first person in politics to plan the integration of information technology and biotechnology  it bt  when he was the chief minister of maharashtra in     .sharad pawar has cultivated a deep political and socio cultural network. there is hardly any field where he has not left his footprint. if he has held the presidentship of kabaddi sangh  then he has also been at the helm of board of control for cricket in india  bcci . he is the permanent president of y.b. chavan centre as well as the nehru centre  mumbai s two leading socio cultural intellectual centres.sharad pawar s influence over the indian administrative service in maharashtra remains comprehensive even today. pawar is respected in bureaucratic circles and police establishment as if he is still the  boss . indeed  he is known more as  pawar saheb .he remains in regular contact with industrialists as well as technocrats. at one point  many industrialists had campaigned for his prime ministership. rahul bajaj went on to say that  sharad pawar is the best prime minister india never had .at     pawar and his ncp have received a new lease of life. unfazed by the defections and taking the ed case in his stride  pawar has become the victim hero in maharashtra and the bjp is suddenly on the defensive.the ncp may not come to power  but pawar will continue to have a  houdini  dimension to his personality. perhaps even houdini would have appreciated the political acrobatics of sharad pawar.the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




no trade deal  no kashmir win  no investment but bjp celebrating modi return from us
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi saturday returned home to a rousing welcome from bjp party workers and supporters despite not having secured the much touted trade deal with the us. also  the issue of kashmir became further complicated between him and us president donald trump despite a massive spectacle of bonhomie between the two leaders at  howdy  modi  .prime minister modi scored clear nil in the most contentious issue of trade during his weeklong trip to america. trade has undoubtedly become an unavoidable stumbling block in the relationship  even as both sides continue to fiercely fight out trade disputes at the world trade organization  wto .while it is true that commerce and industry minister piyush goyal continues to brainstorm along with us trade representative robert lighthizer in washington dc  a so called  limited  trade deal remains as elusive as it was before modi s visit.also read  modi has convinced the world kashmir is india s internal affair   but they re still watchingno trade dealwhen the modi government came back to power for the second time with a landslide victory earlier this year  the us was clearly not amused. within days of the government settling into office  the trump administration cracked the whip on india in may and revoked the trade benefits given under the generalised system of preferences  gsp  programme. the us was threatening to do so since before the elections. this was an unprecedented act on us  part because ever since the gsp programme started in       it was never taken away from india.it is true that previous us administrations  particularly the barack obama administration  did threaten to revoke it  but in reality  it never walked the talk much to india s relief.india  on the other hand  whether it was under former prime minister manmohan singh or under prime minister modi  has always claimed  rather arrogantly  that the withdrawal of gsp did not impact india s foreign trade much. new delhi s public posturing has always been that the gsp  or tariff free access to us markets for indian goods  is not really needed as india is not an underdeveloped country anymore.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhowever  exporters tell a different tale.indian shipments under gsp programme get a benefit of around   .  billion  which is now gone. it was widely expected that the gsp would be restored during prime minister modi s trip  and it seemed all the more plausible after  howdy  modi    but eventually it turned out to be a damp squib.this despite trump being a  true  warm  friendly and accessible  friend of modi s.prime minister modi was not even able to restore a waiver from us  high duties on indian shipments of steel and aluminium during his mega visit.in march       the us raised duties on indian exports of steel and aluminium under section     of the us trade expansion act of      on  national security  grounds. despite several pleas  america has not given india an exemption from it.currently  both sides continue to discuss the trade deal and it remains shrouded in secrecy. india has not been able to offer much to the americans in terms of lowering tariffs on information and communications technology  ict  products or doing away with price caps on medical devices.trade ties under trump administration have gone from bad to worse. since       the us has not held its annual dialogue on trade   us india trade policy forum   with india.meanwhile  both sides continue to fight out a plethora of costly cases at the wto. in fact  in       the us was on the brink of imposing trade sanctions on india through the wto over a decade long poultry dispute.also read  how modi  imran gave trump a   week crash course in the nasty history of indo pak tiesa washout investment roundtablelet us not forget that the modi government has anyway been averse to trade since the very beginning. it had reopened all the existing trade agreements that india has with partner countries for a review in his modi s first term and the process is still underway.prime minister modi has been keener on foreign direct investment. hence  a major highlight of his visit was an investment roundtable organised under the umbrella of  invest india  where american business honchos participated.during his weeklong trip  modi met around    american energy conglomerates from the oil and gas sector in texas and    american multinationals from banking to defence  in new york. even on that front  india was left high and dry as none of the american multinationals that met and applauded  modi s vision  yet committed to any big ticket investment  which could have come as a respite for a slowing indian economy that is facing rapid job losses.this at a time when american companies based in china are aggressively looking for greener pastures due to the raging us china trade war.only one mou was signed between india s petronet and american oil and gas major tellurian inc. under this mou  india s petronet will buy    per cent equity stake in tellurian s proposed driftwood lng terminal for   .  billion. both sides will conclude the contract by    march next year. so  the promise of     billion trade and        jobs that modi highlighted as an outcome of the mou also are castles in the air for now.despite pleas about india s improvement in ease of doing business index and smoother taxation  american investors cited issues such as data localisation  complex taxation and other stringent regulatory processes as hurdles for investing in india.also read  modi on terror  imran on kashmir  greta on climate   new york saw all the action this weekkashmir gets further complicatedon the issue of kashmir  too  prime minister modi could not extract much from his  friend  trump. while trump continued the rhetoric of mediating the kashmir issue between new delhi and islamabad unabashedly  the us also demanded  rapid action  in easing restrictions in jammu kashmir  and urged india to hold elections at the  earliest opportunity .during his bilateral meeting with modi  president trump told the prime minister that to the us  iran is a bigger concern as far as terrorism is concerned than pakistan. he also said in front of modi that the prime minister and his pakistani counterpart imran khan will  get along well  if they meet.this was the third meeting between modi and trump in the prime minister s second term.but it was an anti climax when president trump s parting shot to pm modi was   i think prime minister modi and prime minister khan will get along when they get to know each other. i think a lot of good things will come from that meeting. subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi wants to rebuild new delhi for no good reason
text size  a  a the narendra modi government wants to  develop redevelop  the heart of the capital of india  the central vista that extends from rashtrapati bhavan to india gate in new delhi. the question is  why  what is the need to do so  what s the objective the central public works department has issued a notice inviting tenders  but the bid document  titled   development redevelopment of parliament building  common central secretariat and central vista at new delhi   says very little about the objective. the government doesn t even know whether it wants to  develop  the central vista or  redevelop  it. surely there must be some difference between the two.it further reads   the objective of the bid documents is to re plan the entire central vista area from the gates of rashtrapati bhavan up to india gate  an area of approximately four square kilometres. a new master plan is to be drawn up for the entire central vista area that represents the values and aspirations of a new india   good governance  efficiency  transparency  accountability and equity and is rooted in the indian culture and social milieu. the central vista buildings were designed by lutyens and baker by assimilating indian architectural styles into the idea of a capital city as it exists in the west. the similarity between the rashtrapati bhavan s dome and that of the sanchi stupa is not coincidental.how are new buildings going to  represent  new india  how does a new building  represent   good governance  efficiency  transparency  accountability and equity   is it worth the time  money and effort to build a new capital just to  represent  values and aspirations  would it not be better to practice  good governance  rather than  represent  it in architecture also read  why people endorse modi s economic performance despite economic slowdownon what basis the note says   the master plan shall entail concept  plan  detailed design and strategies development redevelopment works  refurbishment works  demolition of existing buildings as well as related infrastructure and site development works. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhich building should be refurbished  which ones would be demolished completely only to be built anew  and such decisions will be based on what  what is the plan even trying to achieve  the note doesn t say.what it harps on about instead is this   these new iconic structures shall be a legacy for     to     years at the very least.  the central vista is part of new delhi that was completed only in     . it is not even     years old. the government wants to build a new capital that will last         years  but what makes it think the current one  less than     years old  is obsolete it adds   most of the buildings in the central vista area are more than       years old and have either outlived or approaching their structural lives.  the document cites no study to show that the buildings have outlived their  structural lives . if a building must be demolished after       years  how  and why  is this new construction supposed to last     years the government notice then makes another unsubstantiated claim   buildings constructed over     years ago such as north and south block are not earthquake safe.  once again  no study has been cited to show they are earthquake unsafe.urban development minister hardeep singh puri has clarified that north block and south block are heritage buildings  so their facade won t be demolished. similarly  the facade of the parliament building won t be touched. but if they are not earthquake safe  shouldn t they be rebuilt  or is the modi government looking at seismic retrofitting  is that the objective the note says   there is shortage of working spaces  parking  amenities and services. the spread of central government ministries and departments in different locations leads to inefficiencies and difficulty in coordination.  minister puri has similarly said the central vista   lacks basic public facilities  amenities and parking. the unorganized vending and haphazard parking leads to congestion and gives a poor public perception. therefore  there is a need for its upgradation. also read  demonetisation  gst  now kashmir. modi govt doesn t think beyond the first step world class actually  the central vista is one of the least congested parts of delhi. traffic keeps moving. if at all there s any problem it is due to security restrictions around india gate  especially around republic day. as for co ordination between ministries  surely they use the internet these days the note says a  common central secretariat  is to be built by july     . so  instead of having separate buildings for the railways and agriculture ministries  they will all become part of one building. goodbye rail bhavan  krishi bhawan  udyog bhawan and all the other bhawans. but why  what s the need  how will this make our trains run on time and prevent our farmers from committing suicide  if the parliament building  north and south block can be refurbished without being demolished  why can t the same be done to the bhawans the note says the redevelopment would make the central vista  a world class tourist destination by november      . that s like saying we want to redevelop the taj mahal to make it a  world class tourist destination . it is already one  international tourists are shunning delhi not because the central vista isn t good enough. they are avoiding delhi because it is one of the world s most polluted cities and also one of the most unsafe for women. demolishing many of central delhi s buildings is only going to add more dust in the city s air.so what exactly is the reason behind building a new capital  is it belief in the pseudo science of vastu  most of these buildings came up from            and they are very imposing   minister puri has said. one wonders what the problem with those particular    years is. the buildings are imposing  well  the most imposing buildings are north block and south block but their facade isn t going to be touched. so what s the point  rashtrapati bhavan and india gate are also not going be to touched   hopefully.if you think the minister has a problem with only those    years from      to       he soon contradicts himself. he is equally unhappy with buildings that came up after independence.  but those made after independence  some of these seem to have been built in a hurry  and may have outlived their purpose   he says. and yet  the government wants to build an entire new capital in a similar hurry.also read  india s economic crisis has only one root cause dream project minister puri has made it clear the whole idea is prime minister narendra modi s  dream project . in other words  prime minister modi had a dream. just as shah jahan decided to build a grand mausoleum for his wife  modi wants to build a new capital for his vanity. every emperor wants to build his own capital  and emperor modi is no different.the tender bid document has so many conditions for potential bidders that it seems to be designed to award the contract to a pre selected party. it will cost a lot of money  resources  cause environmental damage  threaten heritage  all those things for what  just to satisfy the megalomania of the prime minister the central vista is heritage made through public money. it is a visual representation of india known across the world. before undertaking a once in a century project like this  the government should first hold a public consultation and carry out studies by experts to determine what is wrong with the central vista buildings and amenities  and what s the best way to address the problems. we don t need a tughlaqi rebuilding of a new capital.here s a nugget for narendra modi  building a new capital in delhi has often not brought great fortune for its rulers. the temporary office of the viceroy of india in north delhi  the viceregal lodge  today houses the office of the vice chancellor of delhi university. a signboard outside tells its history  how the viceroy worked out of here while the viceregal palace  now the rashtrapati bhavan  was being built.the new capital designed by lutyens and baker was ready in       but the british didn t get to enjoy it much  having to leave india    years later. the heading above this signboard reads  dilli dur ast    delhi is still far. the words were spoken by nizamuddin auliya for another ruler of delhi  ghiyasuddin tughlaq  who built tughlaqabad  but didn t get much time to enjoy it either.views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in the us  modi out trumped trump   forced rss to swallow its protectionist agenda
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi will return home this weekend after delivering his speech at the un s   th general assembly session friday. it s been a long week and modi has reasons to be satisfied with his performance in america  where he has met political leaders from across the globe   from us president donald trump to iranian supremo hassan rouhani.back home  we are suitably chuffed that trump compared modi to the king of rock  n  roll  making several indians turn to google with the query  who was elvis presley  .you might ask why indians care so much about modi being accepted in the west  and whether it s the east india company question all over again. congress leader jairam ramesh once put it cruelly  but succinctly  describing india s love hate relationship with the all powerful us.  yankee go home. but take me with you   he wrote in     .also read  un general assembly shows a new india  and world gets to see modilateralismtaming the critics withinover breakfast with top american ceos this week  modi asked the executives to come invest in india  which he pitched as the  only destination . indulging in his penchant for acronyms  modi said that india s attractiveness as an investment destination is due to the  four ds  democracy  demography  demand   decisiveness.  one wonders what the swadeshi jagran manch  the rss  economic affiliate determined to protect indian business from foreign monsters  must be thinking.except that the sjm s co convenor ashwani mahajan too was in new york this week  meeting e commerce players  investors et al  vociferously denying that the sjm was against fdi.but mahajan gave the game away when he was forced to ask commerce minister piyush goyal on twitter why india has agreed to drop technology transfer requirements as a precondition to becoming a member of the china led regional comprehensive economic partnership  rcep . mahajan described it as  a meek surrender. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowindia s position on rcep  a meek surrender concessions offered are  disturbing . indications suggest that the provisions are not only detrimental to the interests of the economy  but are also contrary to the stated position of nda   swadeshimanch  https   t.co qm f  sra    ashwani mahajan   ashwani mahajan  september         for the moment  though  modi is on top. the rss seems to be on board with the plan to open up the economy  realising that it must go along with the man who doesn t brook any domestic opposition. the rss knows modi is that one big ticket who will help expand their ideology across the country.dumping the likes of ashwani mahajan who went hammer and tongs against walmart in      or against monsanto  the producer of genetically modified bt cotton seed  in      is a small price to pay for the stagnating economy. especially when both the bjp and the rss are fully aware that if anything could hurt the government  it will be the lack of money in people s pockets   not rahul gandhi or sharad pawar or mamata banerjee.also read  price hike  joblessness  slow economy. yet  it s advantage bjp in maharashtra   haryanathe kashmir conundrummodi s other challenge  when he returns home this weekend  will be kashmir. national security adviser ajit doval has returned to the besieged valley and is expected to camp there for a few days. there are attempts to usher in a second rung of leaders   some kashmiris have been brought to delhi and have met home minister amit shah  among other leaders.but what does the modi government do about mp farooq abdullah as well as former chief ministers mehbooba mufti and omar abdullah who have been under house arrest along with several others since   august  how do both delhi and kashmir s political mainstream save face and achieve a compromise modi s tumultuous evening in houston  texas will go down as one of the most successful visits abroad by an indian prime minister. but now comes the hard part. senior us officials have told the press that modi has outlined a vision for kashmir s return to normalcy  as well as the return of political mainstream in the new union territory. the us is believed to looking forward to modi implementing his plans.certainly  trump feels for modi who is elvis. how many world leaders can come to america and out trump trump himself  but when the us president comes down to earth  he knows he must assuage imran khan too. after all  the pakistani prime minister owns the key to stability in election bound afghanistan   something khan had admitted to at a meeting of the american think tank council on foreign relations in new york this week.modi gets an a grade for his trip to america this week. he didn t fight shy of meeting the iranian president hassan rouhani within days of meeting the latter s mortal enemy  donald trump. in fact  he met trump twice in the space of two days.now  if only  that plaintive bleat of indians seeking a middle ground on kashmir  actions on the slowing economy and over the treatment of minorities is as old as     . modi isn t about to listen to their ideas of india. he has his own.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




un general assembly shows a new india  and world gets to see modilateralism
text size  a  a new york and the world this week witnessed modilateralism or a multilateralism that was driven largely by domestic interests and objectives. at the united nations general assembly  prime minister narendra modi displayed a shift in india s approach to multilateralism by drawing a link between his government s development agenda with global challenges like climate change  universal health coverage and issues like counterterrorism where the un  not india  has fallen short.india s current multilateral impetus works from the ground up  leveraging strides made on domestic issues to demonstrate its credibility as a global stakeholder  neutralising calls that india should perforce contribute more. also evident in this  modilateral  approach is the use of multilateral platforms to push for stronger rules in areas like counterterrorism where new delhi requires the support of other countries to address the problem.strategic to tacticalpm modi s approach differs from how other indian leaders have generally handled multilateralism. early on  india championed causes like human rights and decolonisation for practical and moral reasons. as decades rolled  the nature of multilateral engagement changed  reflecting the times and india s own position. from the early     s  indian negotiators became strategic  looking to cut deals and make compromises when necessary.under modi  the approach has turned more tactical  with new delhi becoming sensitive to the reality that given india s sheer size  her domestic policy achievements redound to the benefit of global governance. a focus on the domestic is  in itself  of global significance. multilateral diplomacy then becomes a tool to emphasise and resolve problems like terrorism  tax havens and protectionism that restrain globalisation. modi s approach at unga this week reflects this thinking.also read  keep sipping globalisation kool aid and you won t get trump s globalist vs patriot un lineclimate change and india s agendathe agenda at the   th unga session is dominated by one issue   climate change. the matter has been the subject of days of protests worldwide led by youth frustrated over inaction. a series of unpredictable climate events this summer   fires  floods  famines and heat waves   have generated a fresh impetus to reduce global carbon emissions.yet  palpable public exaltation around climate change that manifest through epic marches in global capitals is scotched by inhospitable political forces. there is a vacuum in climate leadership in western countries  which is exemplified by a disinterested united states  cooling global economy that places a premium on growth instead of mitigation  and regulatory rollback against climate change through the reversal of rules covering vehicular emissions  coal expansion and pipelines.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhen politics in western countries militate against concrete global climate progress  it is time to focus on domestic mitigation that could help the larger climate cause. india s current climate policies serve as a lodestar here.at the unga  modi reaffirmed india s commitment to fulfil its nationally determined contributions  ndc  as per the      paris climate agreement. the modi government has instituted robust energy efficiency policies that ensure india s emissions remain compatible with the paris target of capping temperature increases to  .  degrees celsius despite plans to build more coal plants. climate also featured in modi s meeting with pacific island nations for whom climate is the priority. besides financial assistance  india s focus on renewables and promises to share the technical expertise related to them provide an alternate pathway for island countries to combat climate change. india s multilateral climate agenda springs out of domestic climate initiatives.also read  greta thunberg told world leaders at un climate meet they failed  most of them agreedon health and securitymodi also addressed the un high level meeting on universal health coverage  uhc  that hopes to convince un member states to develop affordable broad based health policies. here too  global health interests align with india s own cause to boost domestic health coverage through the government s ayushman bharat  the world s largest healthcare initiative. modi s uhc endorsement reflects commitments made to augment domestic health coverage.that india is willing to spend the necessary financial resources to build resilient health systems enhances global health security when risks to the latter continue to proliferate. new delhi s incentive to boost access to health  the affordability and the delivery system arises from a domestic purpose that aligns with current global health priorities  not vice versa. new delhi looks poised to contribute to global health stability by insuring the welfare of its citizens who constitute a fifth of humanity.on security  modi joined several world leaders at the leaders  dialogue on strategic responses to terrorist and violent extremist narratives  where he voiced india s concerns on cross border terrorism  in an oblique reference to pakistan. focusing on counter terrorism enables india to project itself as a constrained rising power that must  occasionally  deploy harsh measures to neutralise cross border threats. the forum allowed modi to push for institutionalising counterterrorism cooperation multilaterally to ensure financing and arms are not used to propagate terror.also read  modi announces      million line of credit to pacific island nationsbuilding on the legacyindia s  modilateral agenda  this week was meant to highlight how new delhi s policies are helping address global challenges. but this focus deflects questions on whether india can and should contribute more to these challenges or if they cohere with what is required globally. unlike his immediate predecessor manmohan singh  modi s multilateralist tendencies dispense with prosaic notions of internationalism that india can contribute toward  instead  modi is keen to demonstrate india s global importance as a country striving to better its economic trajectory.this tactical multilateralism is also a legacy of three decades of india s integration with the global economy that has given new delhi multiple opportunities to shape international rules and causes that advance incumbent interests while bolstering its reputation as a partner keen to address pressing global challenges.the author is research fellow  institute of south asian studies  national university of singapore. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




the panch tattva that modi govt must adopt to revive indian economy
text size  a  a the epochal reduction in corporate tax rate by the narendra modi government has been welcomed by india s corporate and investment fraternity in equity markets. the unexpected relief is likely to provide succour to india s slowing economic engine  which was badly battered after the implosion of the country s largest shadow bank il fs last year. this crisis that led to heightened risk aversion has impacted aggregate demand in many consumer focused sectors like auto and auto ancillaries  consumer durables and staples  consumer finance including housing  etc. the reserve bank of india has responded by embracing aggressive monetary accommodation  and reduced repo rates by  .  per cent percentage points since february  besides infusing large amounts of liquidity.although equity markets have cheered the unprecedented tax cuts that would sustainably improve the companies  cash flows and return on equity  bond markets have exhibited a sense of nervousness due to a large shortfall in direct taxes of around rs  .  lakh crores as a result of this measure. this would be in addition to an estimated shortfall of rs        crores in gst collections for the current financial year. with government expenses being relatively sticky and inelastic  there are genuine fears of large fiscal slippage. all eyes will be on modi government s borrowing programme for the second half of fy        . any sharp increase in fiscal deficit is likely to lead to an immediate spike in bond yields and crowding out of productive sectors.the government needs to lay out a clear roadmap as to how it intends to bridge this yawning revenue loss. the rbi s transfer of surplus capital of rs        crore in addition to the record dividend of rs  .   lakh crore to the modi government would plug the gap to a certain extent.also read  modi govt bulldozed through corporate tax cuts so pm could look good in houstonpanch tattva economy needsthere are five immediate measures that the modi government could undertake to invigorate india s sagging economy.first  an aggressive and bold privatisation programme entailing strategic sales of mega psus like bpcl  air india  mtnl  and a few large public sector banks could be considered. this would not only help in bridging the fiscal gap substantially  but also galvanise foreign and domestic companies to pour tens of billions of dollars in acquiring these large indian franchises. these sales would also stop the continuous haemorrhaging of government finances as a result of the infusion of thousands of crores of tax payer funds as capital in many of these loss making basket cases. the government would need to expend its political capital to overcome any opposition for this economically vital though politically not so popular measure. with a strong mandate and its political acumen in managing numbers even in the rajya sabha  the modi government must not let go of this opportunity in ushering this reform.second  despite reservations expressed by some within the nda and those in the left  the modi government must go ahead with its plan to issue sovereign bonds in foreign currency. it would help diversify the indian government s borrowings in different international markets that have immense depth  and offer extremely fine rates. this would also alleviate pressure on domestic interest rates and reduce interest burden for local businesses and individuals.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  nirmala sitharaman s corporate tax cut is tangential  because lack of demand ails economythird  to encourage long term investments in equity markets and incentivise risk taking abilities  the modi government needs to scrap long term capital gains tax if an equity share or equity oriented mutual fund unit is held for three years and beyond. many long term investors like pension funds  insurance funds  endowments  family offices and trusts  which typically have a very long term holding horizon  would provide a strong ballast to the indian equity market  and help in tamping down the volatility of fickle foreign institutional investor flows.fourth  in the         union budget  finance minister nirmala sitharaman announced that fdi caps would be revisited for capital intensive sectors such as aviation and insurance. the modi government needs to immediately announce a liberal increase in fdi caps as many global behemoths are waiting eagerly in the wings to participate in one of the largest market opportunities in the world. any increase in fdi cap for the insurance sector is likely to be accompanied by a similar rise in cap for pension funds. this can help catalyse tens of billions of dollars of fdi inflows immediately  besides infusing a healthy dose of heightened competition in these industries   ultimately benefiting indian consumers.fifth  despite making many pious announcements of monetising assets on large scale of entities like the nhai  operational roads   surplus land and other non core assets belonging to the indian railways and other government departments as well as increased participation of private sector in the defence sector  the progress has been extremely tardy. the pmo needs to pro actively intervene  and set time bound deadlines for these monetisation programmes. many sovereign wealth funds  global pension funds  etc. need to be wooed as this programme can help india s cash starved government in recycling of capital. the amount thus raised can be used as equity capital by these entities. with accompanying debt leverage it would start the virtuous cycle of investments that will have a significant economic multiplier impact.also read  modi govt must treat farmers as businessmen   introduce ease of doing agri business indexif the narendra modi government wholeheartedly adopts these  panch tattva  or five elements  it will help the indian economy shed its lethargy and regain a sense of vigour and vitality.the author is the ceo   chief portfolio manager of pms prabhudas lilladher. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




bbc   al jazeera footage of soura clashes were from security cameras  and modi govt knew
text size  a  a in kashmir  it is hard to find the  truth . anthropologically speaking  conflict societies are prone to exaggeration and conspiracy theories triggered by fear. but having been to iraq  syria and afghanistan  i find the level of diversion and exaggeration in kashmir to be astounding. rumours here take hold quickly and spread like wildfire.so  i went to kashmir and asked people what tv channels they watch. invariably  the reply was   we don t trust indian channels  they all lie. we only watch al jazeera  ndtv and sometimes rt.  when i asked the residents  the jammu and kashmir police and crpf personnel about the bbc and al jazeera s footage of the soura clashes  most of them responded with added stories of massive protests  none of which i could personally verify.what i could  however  verify from all sources was that clashes between the protesters and the security forces  as reported by the bbc and al jazeera  did take place in srinagar s soura on    august. but there s a deeply disturbing and confusing story of their genesis.also read  i went to meet pellet gun victims in soura  the new epicentre of kashmir s angerflummoxed police  crpfthe first problem is that the jammu and kashmir police and the central reserve police force  crpf  still don t how the incident was triggered. in srinagar s soura  there are troops present every     metres  including in the narrow bylanes i went into. as i travelled through the streets  i kept wondering how easily the troops would have reported the protest or any gathering of more than       people the moment it had happened. and yet this was not done  the why remains a mystery.it turns out  the crpf personnel were not aware of the protests until their spotters on the ground started  reporting crowds of over        which had gone up to around       by the time we arrived . several security men insist that the footage taken from different angles and different cameras were in fact  security camera footage   jenab sahib mosque area  and those taken by security videographers  ganderbal road . they did in fact show me the angles and locations that at least two sequences in the spliced videos were shot from.but curiously  the narendra modi government denied the occurrence of soura riots at first. it later admitted to the clashes and even to the use of pellet guns.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis is where the local constables and jawans don t get three things  . how did the security camera footage find its way into the hands of the foreign press  . who sent the media advisory from kashmir to the centre to outrightly deny the soura riots  . who in the centre approved this lie  allowing it to become the official line despite knowing that camera footage existed also read  bakarwal nomads return to the plains as business dries up due to kashmir shutdownplanned sabotage like all rumour based societies  the rather disturbing story is that there was some kind of collusion with a deliberate intent to sabotage   the crowd of protesters wasn t detected at an early stage  it had successfully managed to coordinate without whatsapp or sms  mobile internet services in kashmir continue to be restricted   if the protesters were congregated through loudspeakers  why were the calls not heard and responded to the gathering was allowed to grow  the security camera footage was leaked  a recommendation was made to lie about it  and a central directive followed that maintained this lie.another thing that the local constables and jawans confirmed was that they did not use live rounds  but did use lots of teargas and limited pellets. almost everyone found it bewildering why the modi government couldn t have simply stuck to the truth about police action against a murderous and violent crowd  which they believed  would have done us harm .this is definitely something that home minister amit shah  national security adviser  nsa  ajit doval and prime minister narendra modi will have to ponder over.also read  how doctors in kashmir are dealing with lockdown   with anti anxiety pills   generosityno shortage of medicinethe other major rumour was of medicine shortage. all four hospitals that i visited   sher i kashmir institute of medical sciences  skims   shri maharaja hari singh  smhs  hospital  lal ded hospital and govind ballabh pant hospital   confirmed there were no shortages. even doctors who had no love lost for india said the same thing in private  one on one conversations.which bring us to the second part of the story and the  two wall street journal women  who reported on the security clampdown in kashmir. it turns out that both of them had stayed in the same hotel as me  and the staff there said that the hospital opposite to them had been functioning to full capacity the entire time. i have photographic evidence to confirm this.moreover  the staff at skims  smhs  lal ded and gb pant hospitals  in one on one discussions with me  confirmed that they had developed procedures to ensure excellent stocking given the shutdowns that had happened in       alleged fake encounter killings of three civilians         floods         burhan wani . the independent chemist shops  on the other hand  said they did not have a few medicines but told me to ask for them in other nearby shops  assuring me i would get the medicines there.to sum up  clashes in soura did take place  but both al jazeera and bbc were fed spliced security camera footage from within  and this was compounded by a clumsy pr plan of the modi government. the wall street journal s story on empty hospitals and a medical crisis  on the other hand  are complete fabrication and lead one to question if the two journalists were deliberately twisting facts or were being fed by their stringers.the author is a senior fellow at the institute of peace and conflict studies. he tweets  iyervval. views are personal.this is the second part of a series by the author based on his recent kashmir visit. read the first part here.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




times now did not stop at howdy modi   it went on to claim kashmir s hindu homes  wiped 
text size  a  a astronomers say there are over          million stars in the sky  but for us there are only three that matter  the rock star  the film star  and gaurav sawant  the accidental media star after us president donald trump recognised him as a  great reporter .trump said something very similar about a pakistani reporter    i like this reporter    a day earlier at his joint press conference with pakistan prime minister imran khan  but let that take nothing away from sawant s moment of glory.at a joint press conference with prime minister narendra modi tuesday night  donald trump wistfully longed for journalists like sawant   who asked a question on pakistan   in place of the  fake news  gang he faces in the american media. that has made india today s gaurav sawant instantly  in famous.indiatoday vs aajtak pic.twitter.com st etscza    pratik sinha   free thinker  september         more importantly  trump launched modi into the firmament by anointing him the  father of india   and bracketing him with the rock  n roll legend elvis presley after the prime minister brought the house down at houston s nrg stadium sunday.it was a rowdy  howdy  modi   show.with the        plus  crazy  indian americans seemingly delirious at the sight of modi  trump was left holding hands with him and meekly following him around the stadium in a victory lap   much to the wonder of television audiences  worldwide  no doubt  which wion claimed were watching the show.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  not howdy modi  indian tv channels were busy eating cake   saying hbd modihouston audience trumps news channels show stopper   said ndtv     .  historic and unprecedented   declared times now  for once without exaggeration   it s modi mania .since last saturday  that s what it s been for the indian news channels as they covered the  trump modi tango   india today  and ended up witnessing modi lead trump into a merry dance at the nrg to the rhythmic chants of  modi  modi  and  america  america .however  for once  they were truly trumped and stumped  none of their hyperbole could match the frenzy of the audience at the nrg stadium.  modi josh   cnn news     appeared almost mild when people said   he is the best prime minister we ever had   times now  or   he is a phenomenon of the century    news x .even cnn international that otherwise largely ignored the tamasha in texas was frankly impressed by the energy at the stadium for the  beloved of the indian american community .the tv channels settled for second best. they fed off the frenzy of the indian american community and amplified it when they could   for example  india tv took the form of seating donald trump and narendra modi on horses wearing cowboy stetson hats.also read  modi will always have houston   india  a changed relationship with the ushasan minhaj turned downthe         big room   as trump called the nrg  could not  however  accommodate indian american comedian satirist hasan minhaj  for a lack of  space   or because he made comments on modi that were not  appreciated   as hasan claimed.minhaj settled for second best  he sat outside the nrg stadium and watched the event on his mobile phone while protesters and police argued over  sweaters   kashmere . the supreme irony  minhaj told seth meyers on the american talk show late night with seth meyers  is that his photograph was flashed on the screen inside the stadium as one of the many indian american achievers.but such awkward moments were few and far between that night in houston.also read  hindu group wants a ban on netflix  should streaming platforms be more culture sensitive news channels hungry for actiontv news channels have since applauded modi s every step up to his bilateral meeting with trump in new york tuesday  and denigrated pakistan every inch of the way    america mein modi ki jai  pak mein solid bhay   india news .they went so far as to declare  pakistan me hadkamp  pok mein bhookamp   india tv  after the tuesday earthquake  which was distasteful and needlessly cruel  but indian news channels are not here to win a sensitivity contest. they have an agenda and that is to continue firing across the loc with whatever ammunition they have.here are some examples of just that india today and times now had  world exclusives   apparently  just an  exclusive  will no longer do  because it must have a global footprint to make some real impact. and so the  world exclusive  on times now broadcast satellite images of kashmir where  in the past  hindu homes were allegedly  wiped out    razed  in an ethnic  cleansing exercise   while j k leaders like pdp s mehbooba mufti and nc s farooq abdullah made empty promises to bring hindus back home to kashmir   this inspired by  pakislamistterror .increasingly  times now frames its political narratives in terms of religious identity  for instance  not so long ago  a   pm prime time debate with navika kumar discussed the ayodhya dispute as   are muslims deliberately stalling the ram mandir  and then  india today in its world exclusive  blows the cover  on     acres of pure hell  a.k.a.  pak s dirty secret . it reported that in rawalpindi s kahuta  pakistan has constructed a new  nuke facility  and the  bomb pakistan is hiding . the channel suggests india should be on full alert.while the narendra modi government may  or may not  be contemplating military offensives  the indian news channels are definitely gunning for action.also read  on kbc  amitabh bachchan asks about pressure cooker  and media puts chidambaram in itthe personable big baway from the winds of war and  namosteamerica   india today   in a small corner of the tv screen  bollywood superstar amitabh bachchan asks questions of a young aditya gulia  in the kaun banega crorepati  sony   just hours after he won the dadasaheb phalke award   the episode was recorded before the announcement.this is bachchan at his most personable  he is engaging  modest  witty and warm as he draws his contestants into conversations about themselves. he delivers homely homilies about life  when aditya said his father is his inspiration  bachchan recited a poem about a son making his father proud.bachchan may not win an award for the years he has anchored kbc  but it is certainly his most endearing performance   one that has brought him closer to his audience than any other role he has ever played onscreen.lastly  as home minister amit shah champions the cause of  one nation one language   he will be happy to know that at least some people on tv had heard him  the promo for sony s forthcoming indian idol  proclaims   one country  once voice .subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




critical data on india s higher education is out but only modi has hijacked headlines
text size  a  a while indians were busy celebrating the country s global triumph and commiserating about its terrestrial adventures  two important reports went almost unnoticed. the eighth annual all india survey on higher education         was released by the ministry of human resource development last week. it coincided with the release of four monthly report  unemployment in india   a statistical profile  for may august      by the centre for monitoring india economy.put together  both these surveys point to a simmering volcano of educated unemployment. this could be the visible face of the economic slowdown and could well become a political challenge to the regime.strange as it might look  the quality of statistics available for our higher education institutes has been much poorer than our statistics on school education. sensing this gap  the central government instituted aishe in        . we now have official  self reported and unverified  statistics on the number and nature of higher education institutions  student enrolment  and pass out figures along with the numbers for teaching and non teaching staff. sadly  this official survey does not tell us much about the quality of teaching  learning or research. there is no equivalent of pratham s aser survey or the ncert s all india school education survey.also read  ba   b.tech courses not as popular now as   years ago  reveals higher education surveydegree holders without skillsthe recent aishe         survey flatters to deceive. it tells us that the number of universities in the country is now      more than    per cent up from the     universities the country had in        . the fine print brings bad news  the increase is fuelled primarily by mushrooming of private universities. of the     universities added in the last eight years      were private universities approved by state governments. the report tells us little about the quality of education in these private universities. as someone who sat on the university grants commission  ugc  for a while  i can say that many of these are low grade teaching shops that only bring disrepute to the idea of education. their growth is not good news.in terms of enrolment  we now have  .   crore students doing something or the other in higher education  the number stands at  .   crore if we consider only those who are pursuing proper  regular courses and not the joke that happens in the name of distant learning. this might look impressive unless we remember that this is only    per cent of our population aged between    and   . so  about three fourths of those who should be in higher education are still not there. our higher equation system awards a little less than one crore degrees    .   lakh to be precise  every year. most of these  about    lakh  are students who get an undergraduate degree. most of the students with such degrees learn very little in terms of knowledge  life skills or any other skills relevant to employability. for a country of our size  we produce less than two lakh mphil phd degree holders annually who presumably have some research skills. our higher education faces both a quantitative and a qualitative challenge.one good feature of the report is that it gives social breakup of students and teachers. at least in quantitative terms  women have nearly bridged the gender gap  nearly    per cent of students enrolled in higher education are women. in terms of overall enrolment  the real crisis is not among the scheduled castes    .  per cent of students  compared to    per cent share in population  or even scheduled tribes   .  per cent  as compared to   per cent share in population   both slightly below their population share  but among muslims   .  per cent    their share in higher education is about one third of what it should be as per their share in the population    .  per cent as per last census . the same situation prevails among the teachers too  where even the scs   .  per cent  and sts   .  per cent  continue to be seriously under represented despite legally mandated reservations. we also have the challenge of equity in educational opportunities.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  upset iits complain about times rankings  hrd ministry says improve yourselves firsteducated but unemployednow match this information with the latest estimates generated by the cmie survey on unemployment. the latest report for may august      points to a steady increase in the unemployment rate  which has risen from  .   per cent in may to  .   per cent at the end of august.  the methodology adopted by cmie is a little different from that adopted by the official national sample survey office  hence the estimates tend to vary . this is much above the current global average of  .   per cent as estimated by the international labour organisation.what is most striking here is that unemployment levels rise rapidly with a rise in education level. unemployment is negligible among the uneducated and those who did not go beyond primary school  mainly because they cannot afford to remain unemployed. unemployment level jumps to    per cent  roughly double the national average  among those who are graduates and above.this level of educated unemployment in india is alarming by any standards. the cmie tells us that there are a little over    crore graduates in the country  and of them  .  crore are in the  labour force   i.e. willing and available for work. of these   .   crore have some kind of employment. that leaves nearly one crore     lakh to be precise  persons  mostly youth  with graduate or higher degree who do not have any job whatsoever. the same survey also tells us that while more women are getting education  the rate of unemployment among women is   .  per cent  more than double the rate for men   .  per cent . so  more women in higher education could soon become bad news.also read  modi  trump  putin all put emotions over reason. that s why they keep winninga ticking time bombnow put both the reports together and you are looking at a perfect explosion. nearly one sixth of highly educated youth are unemployed. to this pool of about one crore educated unemployed  we add another one crore every year   those who pass out with degrees from higher education institutions. this pool has more women than ever before. consider the fact that most of these graduates are not just unemployed  they are also unemployable as they bring little knowledge or skills to the market. add economic slowdown to this equation and you know why this could be a ticking time bomb. far from taking in new recruits  companies are retrenching their existing employees. so  these fresh degree holders with aspirations but without skills are being pushed into a market that is not ready to receive any more.this is exactly the kind of situation that has led to social unrest and street riots in many parts of the world. instead of any serious attempt to address this brewing crisis  we get all kinds of distractions. we are concerned about triple talaq  kashmir s integration  chandrayaan landing and howdy  modi  finance minister nirmala sitharaman is busy managing headlines and pleasing the corporates. but we hear very little about any serious initiative to tackle the growing crisis of the educated unemployed. are we waiting for the crisis to erupt  or  is it time to say  howdy  to our youth the author is the national president of swaraj india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




if bjp wins maharashtra  haryana  modi can t take credit for all conquests anymore
text size  a  a an odd quandary stares at narendra modi. the prime minister  used to being solely credited for the bharatiya janata party s election wins one after another  may soon have fresh competition in winnable  popular leaders in the bjp. the election commission has announced the schedule for assembly elections in maharashtra and haryana   both the states where the bjp is in power and has a good shot at coming back. if its respective chief ministers  devendra fadnavis and manohar lal khattar  are able to deliver victories without much help from the prime minister  then it could mean modi can no longer claim credit for all of the bjp s poll successes.modi has unequivocally established himself as the vote catcher  of the bharatiya janata party  bjp   the only face it can rely on for electoral hits in the last five years. the invincible modi certainly won t want to let any election slip. but the emergence of strong state leaders who could hold their turf without him doing the heavy lifting doesn t bode well for him either.the trend so farmodi came to power with a handsome mandate in the      lok sabha election  with the bjp winning     of     lok sabha seats. obviously  all credit went to the former gujarat chief minister whose  wave  managed to catapult a majority win for a single political party after decades. since then  all assembly election results too have highlighted a certain trend.states where modi was the main face throughout the election campaign  the bjp pulled off big  even miraculous  victories. for instance  the      win in tripura. the state was a left bastion of the left with the bjp without any base. the      assam election was also scripted with modi as the hero  yet another state where the bjp stormed to power for the first time.uttar pradesh in      became another instance of a massive bjp victory following an election fought only  and only  in modi s name  with party president amit shah s ground strategy providing a solid base. voters who supported the bjp did so for modi  with many even unsure of who their immediate candidates were.also read  how bjp is making article     the focal point of its maharashtra poll campaignthe      gujarat elections did have chief minister vijay rupani at the helm  but there is little doubt it was modi who held sway on his home turf all the way.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowdelhi       on the other hand  was a disaster. the party decided to project kiran bedi as its candidate for chief minister and lost miserably. many in the party privately said if that poll had been fought with modi as the face  the bjp would have had a better shot   if not at winning  then at least at losing more respectably. in the karnataka election last summer  the bjp may have emerged as the single largest party but could not touch the magic number  doing so only a year later riding on defections and underhand tactics.the most telling  however  were the elections in madhya pradesh  rajasthan and chhattisgarh   all held in the winter just before the      lok sabha election. in all three states  the bjp had strong regional satraps   shivraj singh chouhan  vasundhara raje  and raman singh. none of them were first time chief ministers  all three had a strong mass base and hold over party organisations. they were powerful leaders in their own right and the elections carried their distinctive stamps.the bjp went on to lose all three elections in varying degrees   a neck and neck fight in madhya pradesh  a better than expected performance in rajasthan  and an absolute rout in chhattisgarh. many analysts observed at that time that modi wasn t investing all his energy into these state campaigns. with three of the bjp s most powerful and influential leaders failing to deliver  modi s image as the party s sole vote catcher was further cemented.also read  bjp is confident  shiv sena aggressive as maharashtra assembly poll countdown beginswhat haryana maharashtra wins would meanwhat the bjp has witnessed in the last few years is that no big leader   national or otherwise   can match modi s prowess in winning votes. devendra fadnavis and manohar lal khattar will not be anywhere close to challenging modi even with impressive wins. but it will be a sign that the bjp has able regional leaders worth their salt and modi cannot continue to take credit for all wins.there s also the question of scope for the gen next to groom themselves under modi amit shah s shadow. the    year old fadnavis is articulate  successful  carries a strong development image  holds the ability to govern well and manage crisis  and  most importantly  has roots in the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss . a second term as chief minister   especially if the victory is in his name   will add to this young bjp leader s future prospects of growing nationally.this isn t to say that modi will not be crucial to the bjp s campaign in maharashtra and haryana  or that amit shah s strategy will not provide the much needed backbone. but if the bjp wins these two states  a band of winnable  next generation mass leaders will emerge   something that has been missing during modi s rise in the party since he became prime minister in the summer of     .subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




trump has finally accepted modi s friend request and all is well
text size  a  a when the leader of a country goes on an official visit to another nation  s he usually praises that country. but  howdy  modi   was not an official india us event. it was a private affair organised by a little known organisation of indian americans  texas india forum. modi lavishly praised trump  and trump lavishly praised modi. it was a match made in heaven  two leaders for whom everything is always about themselves.modi began his speech by saying he represented     crore indians. so  when they asked him  howdy  modi    he gave his short reply  in several indian languages   everything is fine . subtly but surely  he was equating himself with india. modi is india  and india is modi.it is with this same formula of personal praise that modi has finally won trump over  after nearly three years of trying.  he was a household name   modi said of trump   and very popular even before he won to occupy the highest office in this great country.  this was only the beginning   modi went on for quite a few minutes in his praise of trump  saying exactly what trump wanted to hear.trump has been playing hard to get since he became president in       refusing to give modi the photo ops that he needs for the careful projection of his image. the biggest setback to india us relations was not when the us offered to mediate between india and pakistan in the kashmir issue  or when the us withdrew preferential trade status for india. it was when trump couldn t make it as chief guest for india s republic day celebrations a few months before modi was up for re election. that was the sort of photo op modi really needed  to show his voters how he is personal friends with the most powerful world leader.all that modi needed from trump was optics. work visas for indians and their spouses  friction in trade relations  and tariffs were important issues for trump in front of his domestic audience. he needed to show his voters he was being tough in bringing home more jobs  investments  and more money for exports.also read   howdy  modi   risks dividing the us on relations with indiafriend requestthis was surprising  because modi and trump are too much a mirror image to get along well.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now my good friend barack   is how modi once famously addressed president obama  who on his part stuck to protocol and addressed modi as mr prime minister. trump  on the other hand  is just the sort of leader who wants to say  modi is a friend of mine. he s a great guy. for modi  diplomacy is more about his relationship with foreign leaders than strengthening india s ties with other nations. ditto for donald trump  who likes to be seen as the man who can strike the best deals for america. modi and trump should have thus been a natural partnership. but trump has been cold  if not often hostile  to india for most of his presidency.opposites attract. a liberal obama and a populist modi got along well because obama saw india as a bulwark against china. it puzzled even some americans why modi and obama loved each other so much. it might have helped that most indian americans are democratic voters but obama made it clear he wasn t ever endorsing hindu nationalism. quite the contrary.there s so much in common between trump and modi that it almost seemed trump had learnt from modi. trump became president two years after modi first came to power in may     . both are polarising leaders who claim to represent the marginalised masses from the hinterland against the elites who dominate the capital. both vilify the liberal media  though modi is more subtle. both of them project a personality cult over and above established procedures and protocol. if modi represents hindu nationalism  trump is about white supremacism  and both have a common enemy   islamic terrorism   as trump declared at the texas event sunday.also read  is it smart diplomacy for pm modi to align himself with donald trump s campaign in houston friend request acceptedmodi finally won over trump by giving him what he wants  a pre election endorsement. trump will do anything to win votes  and who could understand that better than modi trump has had recent political trouble in texas. the traditionally republican state saw the democrats doing well in the mid terms. texas could spell trouble for trump in the      presidential election. in such a precarious scenario  every vote counts   and modi is doing his bit to persuade indian american voters to dump the democrats.again  such open endorsement of trump over democrats isn t kosher for a prime minister of india. what if the democrats come to power  won t they snub modi because of this partisan stand  it s the sort of political risk modi and trump love to take  and it pays handsomely.for now  the inevitable has happened. modi and trump are finally friends. the indian american community has been leveraged in the us  domestic politics by india. modi and trump going around a stadium  hand in hand  is just the sort of thing both leaders value the most. all is well.views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




 howdy  modi   risks dividing the us on relations with india
text size  a  a nobody could expect sophistication from an event titled  howdy  modi   and the indian prime minister s rally in houston   attended by        or so screaming indian americans  two dozen u.s. congressmen and senators  and president donald trump   was every bit as cheesy as its title.in his five plus years in power  modi has made a habit of addressing stadiums packed with the indian diaspora around the world. they re part political rally  part celebration of ersatz  indian ness  and part reminder to the locals about the diaspora s size and power. trump isn t the first world leader to turn up  in       david cameron was willing to warm up modi s crowd at wembley stadium. but there s a special triumphal edge to modi s events in america  which once banned him from entering because of  severe violations of religious freedom  under his provincial administration.the only political leader ever to be so sanctioned is now prime minister of india. of course  america has never had trouble working with authoritarians if it needs them. but the number of powerful american politicians willing to stand on stage as a respectful backdrop for modi s speeches is a reminder that india is almost uniquely placed right now  a country that most in the corridors of u.s. power would be willing to woo  but not one seen as a threat. which other foreign politician would be able to expect the presence of not just a president but so many other politicians at a rally on u.s. soil  you certainly couldn t imagine a  howdy  xi   event. for one  the chinese president would probably have insisted the large contingent of protesters outside the venue be pushed out of sight. the prime minister of democratic india made no such demands.also read  modi faces lawsuit in houston  and there s a khalistani lawyer behind the complaintthere are only four million or so indian americans  but they are the richest such community and much in demand as donors and supporters. the  howdy  modi   program began with a tribute to the melding of cultures  a medley of hindu and christian hymns playing while photos of mahatma gandhi and martin luther king were projected to the crowd. then modi and trump came out  it is hard to imagine two leaders less like gandhi and king.trump wasn t shy about underlining what he had in common with modi  and with that crowd in houston. trump s biggest applause line of the night was a condemnation of  radical islamic terror    the phrase he used to complain obama refused to say. trump also told the crowd that india and the u.s. both care deeply about  border security   which i suppose is objectively true  given that the u.s. already has detention camps for thousands of new migrants  and india is building them in preparation for housing tens  perhaps hundreds of thousands of long term residents that it might soon declare stateless. trump also spoke of the     million indians that modi has lifted out of poverty  a statement that is typically misleading  most were lifted out of poverty by the administration of modi s predecessor  manmohan singh. trump knows all about politicians taking credit for their predecessors  achievements.modi  in turn  praised trump s wit  his wisdom  his  mastery  of the  art of the deal   and said he had done great things for america and the world. if nothing else  this might at least lead to some much needed introspection among second generation indian americans  who both skew liberal in u.s. politics and are modi s biggest fans. the indian pm then repeated trump s adaptation of modi s famous      campaign slogan  abki baar modi sarkar    this time  modi s government    to  abki baar trump sarkar    as close to an endorsement as it is possible to go.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowand there  too  lies the danger of this and similar events. as the example of benjamin netanyahu shows  one of the dangers of the era of populists is that it can warp bilateral relationships away from strong bipartisan support. the most modi friendly politician in the u.s. is a democrat  tulsi gabbard  but she couldn t turn up after a recent investigative article revealed her past dependence on hindu nationalist funding. the senior democrat on stage was house majority leader steny hoyer  who was careful in his speech to praise india s pluralism and respect for human rights  as well as the secular values of india s first prime minister jawaharlal nehru   a figure that modi s party men hate and despise.indian americans vote overwhelmingly for democrats  but it is clearly the republicans who intend to pander to their worst instincts. on the very day that trump held modi s hand and took a victory lap around a houston stadium  bernie sanders wrote in the houston chronicle that we might  hear much about the friendship between the american and indian peoples   but an  unacceptable  silence about the human rights crisis in kashmir. a democrat republican divide on india policy isn t in new delhi s interest. nor are events that make the indo u.s. partnership look less like it is based on shared principles and more on the egos of preening populists.   bloombergalso read  fresh from howdy  modi  bonhomie  pm   trump to get cracking on easing trade tensionssubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




massive crowd at howdy modi event in us is a sign of thriving indian nationalism overseas
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi s speech to the indian americans at sunday s event in houston  his third such address in the united states  reflected his effort to solidify the india us partnership. president donald trump addressed the  howdy  modi   event in the presence of over a dozen american congressmen and women  along with senior officials  governors and state legislators.the symbolism of an american president walking hand in hand with an indian prime minister at the end of a rally is a victory for prime minister modi and his administration. at the end of the day  however  the strength of a relationship between any two countries is gauged by its underlying economic and strategic bonds.shared principlesat the heart of the india us relationship has been ties between the two countries  people  something that kept the relationship alive even when there was little to no strategic or military ties and limited economic bonds. this relationship between the oldest and the largest democracy has also been built on the american belief that india is a fellow secular  open and pluralist democracy. on the eve of the    th birth anniversary of india s founding father  mahatma gandhi  it is important to remember the number of american leaders and presidents who have been influenced by gandhi.on sunday  both president trump and democratic house majority leader  congressman steny hoyer  spoke of how indians and americans share common values   similar principles   about how both countries  constitutions begin with the same three words  we the people   and that india is a trusted partner and  most valued  friend of the us. in his speech  modi too referred to india s unity in diversity as being the country s unique quality and emphasised the presence of a vibrant democracy as its core strength.also read  ab ki baar trump sarkar  modi knows the key to winning in india is winning overseas indianssupport from indians abroadin the last five years  pm modi has made indian origin people settled broad a key part of his foreign policy interactions  seek their support both within their country of residence as well as ask them to help with india s economic growth through investment  tourism and trade. the houston rally of        indian americans reflects the pull of indian nationalism  it is rare for foreign leaders to go to another country and hold a rally with their own people there  but it appears natural for an indian leader to do so.in his speech  president trump praised the four million strong indian american community and referenced the deep economic and security partnership between the two countries. trump also referred to himself as the  best friend  india could ever have and referred to modi as the  most devoted and loyal friend  of the us.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  india inc earnings seen jumping     after nirmala sitharaman s tax cutthe economic anglethe primary emphasis of pm modi s speech was to emphasise the domestic reforms his government has accomplished to date   from welfare schemes to those on the economic front   and even a reference to the recent revocation of article     of the indian constitution pertaining to jammu and kashmir. on the economic front  pm modi projected india as an investment friendly destination  speaking of the lowering of corporate tax rates  easing of rules for the entry of foreign direct investment  fdi  into india including in single brand retail. he also mentioned that his government planned on investing   .  trillion in infrastructure reforms.while there was no announcement of a trade deal   not even a  mini  trade deal that had been referenced in the media   it appeared that there was a deliberate effort to avoid references to any areas of tension. modi joked about president trump referring to him as a tough negotiator and praised the latter as being a great one himself  trump too did not once refer to the areas of friction between india and the us on the economic front.the india us bilateral trade has grown from      billion in      to      billion in     . us exports to india in      grew at nearly    per cent while indian exports grew at about    per cent. over the last two years  india has also increased purchase of oil and gas and civilian aircraft and defence equipment from the us.however  india s economic growth has slowed down in the last few years  with the country s gdp currently at around   per cent  down from  .  per cent in         . india thus needs to boost exports  attract both investment and technology  and provide employment to its population  most of whom are under the age of    years. india needs labour intensive economic growth and one potential avenue could be attracting the american   and japanese   companies that are leaving the chinese market. for that india needs to do more than simply lower corporate tax rate   it needs to provide incentives to these companies.also read  will work to make our countries even more prosperous  trump says at  howdy  modi   eventindia in us  scheme of thingsindia lies at the heart of the trump administration s indo pacific strategy and india s support is critical when it comes to confronting a chinese led global order. it was therefore interesting that while trump spoke in detail about the india us security partnership  the only aspect pm modi spoke about was counter terrorism.moreover  while trump spoke about the upcoming india us joint tri service military exercise that will take place in november  there was no reference to both countries upholding the rules based international liberal order  indo pacific or the quad. maybe those will be discussed next week when there are bilateral discussions between the two countries both on the sidelines at united nations general assembly  unga  as well as at meetings in washington dc.indians and indian leaders have always believed that india s millennia old civilisation  critical geostrategic location and population size guarantee it a place under the sun  which the american partnership and support completely reflects. what new delhi needs to bear in mind is that it is india s democratic and pluralist credentials  its rapid economic growth after the     s  large military base and potential  and the rise of china that have made countries around the globe  including the us  look at india with renewed interest.while the india us relationship benefits from personal chemistry between leaders and people to people ties  its long term sustenance rests on economic and defence bonds. to ensure the american and global interest remain intact  india needs to sustain economic growth  its vibrant democracy and build its military capabilities.the author is a research fellow and director  india initiative at the washington dc based hudson institute. her books include  escaping india  explaining pakistan s foreign policy   routledge        and  from chanakya to modi  the evolution of india s foreign policy   harper collins       . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




with trump s presence at  howdy  modi    the prime minister pulled off a political coup   theprint
text size  a  a energy rich texas and energy hungry india came together in an unprecedented celebration this morning when prime minister narendra modi stormed the lone star state. with us president donald trump also present and participating actively  it was literally  history in the making   as modi put it. with a huge crowd of over         not just witnessing  but cheering and heralding it. to me  a defining moment in modi s speech  though unnoticed by most  is when he asked  slightly wryly   what happens if you combine energy with chemistry   he answered  in his own inimitable fashion   synergy. indeed  the whole event was marked by a series of remarkable synergies. first of all between the organisers  the texas india forum  tif   and the entire indian diplomatic establishment led by external affairs minister s. jaishankar. working quietly  if tirelessly  behind the scenes were not only foreign secretary vijay keshav gokhale and indian ambassador to the us harsha vardhan shringla  but the much loved indian consul general in houston  anupam ray. greatly contributing to the effort was a band of over       volunteers  of which some       were  as their local in charge told me  from the baps swaminarayan group alone. many volunteers came from far flung parts of the us as well as even more distant india. the hindu swayamsevak sangh  sewa international  hindu american foundation  and other groups in the us also worked very hard to make the event a huge success.also read  ab ki baar trump sarkar  modi knows the key to winning in india is winning overseas indiansbut   howdy  modi   was by no means sectarian. the strategically placed supporters in saffron were nicely complemented by a large group of dawoodi bohras  in their traditional white and cream clothes  complete with crochet headscarves and skull caps. not only were they conspicuously present  but actively participating  even when trump spoke out against  radical islamic terror . there were large numbers of sikhs  jains  and indians of other religious faiths and denominations  as were americans of indian origin from nearly every state of india.catering to  combining  then celebrating this diversity was one of modi s triumphs. he asked   how are things in india   answering   bharat mein sab accha hai.  he then repeated it in many indian languages   sab chang si   punjabi    baddha majha ma che   his mother tongue  gujarati    anta bagundi   telugu    yella channagide   kannada    ellam sokhiyam   tamil    sarva chhan chalala ahe   marathi    sab khub bhalo   bangla   and  sabu bhalla chi   odiya .he drove home the point that in indian democracy  diversity leads not to division  but strength. this was the kind of cultural and civilisation synergy that india brought not only into its own nation building  but  through its talented immigrants  to the us itself. modi emphasised unity in diversity  which not only jawaharlal nehru had highlighted in his discovery of india  but which is enshrined the motto of the us   e pluribus unum   latin for  out of many  one.  the synergy and shared values between the us and india in their respect for and celebration of diversity  in addition to their joint commitment to unity  were thus underscored.also read  modi shames pakistan in trump presence  says it s time for decisive battle against terrorwe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowas the entertainment showcased prior to the entrance of modi and trump  from gurbani to garba  bharatanatyam to kathak  mohiniattam to modern dancers  and bhangra to indo caribbean rap  indians in america brought a wealth of cultural riches to their host country  besides enormous talent as doctors  engineers  scientists  executives  authors  and leaders of society in every walk of life. something that houston mayor sylvester turner openly acknowledged and lauded in his opening remarks. indeed  a rich variety of senators and congresspersons were present  both republican and democrat  weighing in to demonstrate the range of us political support to india. this bipartisan political synergy was another factor that made the summit memorable.in addition  the summit motto of  shared dreams  bright futures  reminded the audience of the huge aspirational overlap between the american and indian dreams. indians  modi said  were a patient people  but now they were impatient for growth  development  and prosperity. trump congratulated modi on lifting     million people out of poverty. modi hailed trump as a great fighter against terrorism. another set of synergies  bringing trade and terrorism on a common indo us platform  ensued.modi asked the crowd to give a standing ovation to indian legislators who bid  farewell  to article    . he said his party did not have a majority in india s upper house  rajya sabha   but the constitutional amendment was still passed with two thirds majority. he also asked for a standing ovation to trump for the latter s crusade against global terrorism  thus bringing him on india s side in its fight against pakistan. the latter country he did not name  but no one could have been in doubt as to what the epicentre of terror in both      and       could be when he asked where the perpetrators were located. the allegedly pakistan orchestrated protestors were not only outnumbered but rendered rather ineffectual by modi s move. in fact  on the other side of the massive football arena  there were afghans and balochis protesting against pakistan.apparently  modi even made a campaign stump for trump s reelection by reinvoking  ab baar trump sarkar  of  candidate trump . moreover  he called trump india s great friend  just slightly less flattering than the latter s self description as  the greatest friend india has known . trump spoke money and the benefits accruing from india s purchase of oil and gas from texas. modi s vision was broader as he pitched for closer and more long lasting ties between the two countries.  two years back  president trump introduced me to his family   modi said  pausing for effect  then he said dramatically   i now wish to introduce president trump to my family  all of you   he gestured to the huge crowd of supporters and admirers. everyone jumped to their feet. he added   all the  .  billion indians are my family  as well as those indians all over the world whose heritage is indian. by getting trump to speak at his rally  modi pulled off a diplomatic and political coup that is all but unimaginable. the energy  enthusiasm  and excitement of the crowd was certainly incredible  despite the backed up traffic leading to the event and the clogged food lines after  when a smaller group had the privilege of having a very late lunch with the pm. there was music  dancing  and an overwhelming sense of hope and happiness.  howdy  modi   was nothing short of a massive party  a carnival and celebration of both overseas indians and india coming of age. this is what made its synergy so special.the author is a professor and director at the indian institute of advanced study  shimla. his views are personal. his twitter handle is  makrandparanspe.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




ab ki baar trump sarkar  modi knows the key to winning in india is winning overseas indians
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi is perhaps more at home when he is abroad. whether he be in the us taking victory lap holding president donald trump s hand up  or in the uk or rwanda  the prime minister behaves like a global rock star. from saying  howdy  in texas to drumming in japan  modi makes sure his foreign policy initiatives look like energy pumped performances.these events have contributed to modi s larger than life image  nationally and internationally  because he has successfully used them to his advantage  always referring to himself but telling his audience that he stands and speaks there  on behalf of     crore indians . he invokes pakistan and terrorism without mentioning the former  and draws the loudest cheer when he attributes his decision  like the abrogation of article      to one that  people wanted . modi also knows the art of selling new delhi s ties with other countries  repeating over and over again how good a friend of india a particular country is   depending on which country he is making that statement from. however  it is yet not clear whether india s external relations have improved as much.ask not what modi can do for overseas indians  ask what overseas indians can do for him. modi knows his voters. to win indians  you must win nris too.because when it comes to overseas indians  love for modi  an oft quoted salman khan dialogue from dabangg comes to mind  main dil mein aata hoon  samajh mein nahin.also read  tax cut gives modi perfect pitch to win american investmentsmodi s calculusnarendra modi once called new york his  second home . he was a regular in the us  even before he was a prime minister.  summer of      check out young narendra modi hanging out in us  read an article in     .after all  when modi came to power in       many nris had supported him and campaigned for him.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmodi hasn t forgotten their power  and makes it a point to visit indian origin communities in whichever country he visits. according to official data  in his first term  modi covered    countries  in    foreign visits.there is deep rooted angst among overseas indians that modi exploits to his advantage. whether in australia or america  africa or the middle east  they share a sense of longing for their culture while being unhappy with current events in india. modi markets himself as the do er  the saviour and a more active pm than his predecessor.also read  modi faces lawsuit in houston  and there s a khalistani lawyer behind the complaintthe angst of the indiansindian communities abroad hate indian images of poverty  corruption  filth  urban chaos  casteism and reservation policies. but they do not want to give up their wealth and the envious respect they enjoy from fellow indians. they are conscious of the fact that they are seen as  successful and rich . in an alien land  they long to connect with the india they left behind  but they don t actually want to go back to india. this creates a psychological divide.there are over    lakh indians in the us alone. america had become a dream destination of the entire middle class since the          s. their cultural environment back in india was conservative  even religious. suddenly  they found themselves catapulted to the high end of material life in the us. that alienated them from what they believed was their indian identity.not all those families had the legacy of the freedom movement or gandhian values or nehruvian ethos. they either did not know that jawaharlal nehru had started the elite iits  nor did they care about rajiv gandhi s struggles to bring the computer era in india. the upper castes in the us  read brahminical  had a vague relationship with the rss.in a life surrounded by material pleasures  these indian americans began to seek psychological security in the vague idea of hindutva. according to me  till the rath yatra of the late     s  followed by the destruction of the babri masjid by the rss vhp militants  these indians were living in a sort of identarian vacuum. then  the hinduisation of the overseas indians began. they stayed in us  but cursed muslims as pakistanis  discussed how india was being ruined by nehruvian ethos and how it needed a strong leader who wasn t afraid to take a stand.also read  if anything can defeat modi  it s the economya grand illusionnarendra modi provided a perfect foil for their angst. they could travel anywhere to participate in the modi extravaganza. here was a hindu leader putting india on the map  or so they said. he helped them connect with each other and with india.the overseas indians are not too bothered about whether india gets a seat on the un security council or whether it can beat china in economic achievements. they are happy that india is publicly recognised in such events  like by president donald trump in houston. no other prime minister had converted their visits and rallies into political rock  n roll. even if there is no direct benefit to india or to them  they feel energised.narendra modi is a magnificent illusion for indians abroad. the  howdy  modi   event is a more powerful image for the prime minister than chandrayaan  . he had to go. for when they cheer him in the us and elsewhere  indians back home will feel proud. and that s where his real constituency is.the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




as narendra modi meets donald trump  big test is to keep the quiet in kashmir
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi this week met his mother  released a bag of butterflies  and visited the sardar sarovar dam  which was allegedly filled up a month ahead of the schedule so that he could celebrate his birthday by performing a pooja near the dam.there was also the announcement of sanjay leela bhansali s  mann bairagi   a film on the  defining moment of our pm s life   according to the one and only  akshaykumar. and  there were the photos of a young modi released on the occasion  the unmistakable intensity shining through his eyes.like nehru  modi likes to do big things   a big sardar patel statue  big dams  the sardar sarovar  like the bhakra nangal  and most recently  a big political strike on jammu and kashmir. the last one was nehru s doing  which now modi has undone.the obliteration of nehru certainly lies at the heart of the modi manifesto. no other leader continues to stride across india s political consciousness  so many decades later.except  nehru believed that big dams were  temples of modern india  while modi would rather that modernity is about the building of temples  especially one at the contested babri masjid ram janmabhoomi site in ayodhya.also read  hopes of new economic alliances as modi is set to hard sell india to us investorsembracing kashmirisbut as he kicked off the maharashtra poll campaign thursday wearing a faux peshwa headgear  modi returned to the theme that has been front and centre across the country since   august  kashmir.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now phir se ek baar swarg banana hai. har kashmiri ko galey lagaana hai   once again  kashmir has to become heaven on earth and every kashmiri must be embraced    modi said in his address in nashik.it s not clear what the audience thought. back in srinagar     year old sitting mp farooq abdullah sat in his home  now converted into a sub jail  unaware why he s been booked under the public safety act. elsewhere at hari niwas and chashme shahi  palaces and garden houses that are now sub jails  former chief ministers omar abdullah and mehbooba mufti continued to sit out the days and nights in more or less solitary confinement.so  as the pm flies off to the un   where he will refuse to speak on kashmir and hope that the un resolution of      is given a proper burial because j k is now a fully  integrated  part of india   life in the kashmir valley continues to be far from being normal.also read  amit shah s political aim to recover pok is not backed by india s military capacitythe big gamblebut modi knows that the revocation of article     is the biggest gamble of his political career. that it s one thing to fulminate publicly about nehru and why he destroyed india s case by taking kashmir to the un  that kashmir should therefore be stripped off its special status  and that pakistan occupied kashmir belongs to india. but it is another thing to have a non partisan audience abroad believe at least one of these statements.that is why  sources say  instructions have been issued to j k s administrators  nobody should be killed by security forces. arrest who you like  intensify the clampdown  shut down the valley. but no deaths  at least as long as the pm is abroad.so  arrest cpi m  leader yousuf tarigami   who was allowed by the supreme court to travel to delhi for treatment   arrest farooq abdullah  and  detain  hundreds of people or throw them into jails.stifle the voices  as long as the pm is out of the country. it will look terrible if the pm  who has wagered his enormous reputation worldwide on his kashmir gambit  was to be presented with screaming headlines in the international press on the not so nice goings on in kashmir the morning he meets trump  for example.this  then  is modi s big strategy as he embarks upon a very important visit abroad   meeting donald trump in houston  addressing the influential indian american community  note that all major addresses will take place during indian prime time  when tv is buzzing  as well as speaking at the un general assembly.a distracted oppositionback home there is enough noise to distract the opposition. home minister amit shah wants hindi to be the only unifying language across the country and cites ramayana to say that if a war is necessary to protect a woman s honour  then it must be fought. the more the opposition breaks out into a cacophony of argument  the better it is for the bjp   believes the bjp.see how the pm has refused to say a word about all these intensely divisive issues. instead  on the eve of his us visit  he has pressed finance minister nirmala sitharaman to cut corporate tax  a move that has already generated a positive momentum. modi knows that an early baptism by fire awaits.also read  with unga   howdy modi lined up  india s diplomatic ordeal on kashmir isn t over yetsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




illegal immigration was always an issue   modi govt s pan india nrc is a timely move
text size  a  a home minister amit shah has declared that nrc will be introduced across india and action will be taken against illegal immigrants as per the law. nrc stands for national register of citizens  he said  not national register of assam.after assam  chief ministers of bjp ruled states like haryana and uttar pradesh have also hinted at implementing nrc.these demands have caused an alarm about an impending civil war and a second partition among several commentators across india. but a nationwide database of indian citizens is timely  and not a sudden fallout of assam s nrc exercise.illegal immigration has been a political issue not only for the bjp  but has been a part of public conversations in many states for some time now. it was the upa government  which was one of the biggest advocates of the national population register  npr  project after the mumbai terror attacks.amit shah has repeatedly argued that no other country allows illegal immigrants to settle. illegal migration is a huge problem in india and there can be no two ways about it. political patronage  vote bank politics  porous borders  inadequate security mechanisms and corruption are some of the reasons for the mass influx of illegal migrants.but going by the determination of the narendra modi government in executing its agenda  it is only a matter of time before it comes out with a full fledged strategy for a nationwide nrc.president ram nath kovind in his address to parliament in june had said   illegal infiltrators pose a major threat to our internal security  my government has decided to implement the process of  national register of citizens  on priority basis in areas affected by infiltration. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  nationwide nrc call targets muslims but will prove infiltration claims wrong  mahmood madania state wise databaseas the first step towards introducing a pan india nrc  the modi government is considering putting together the national population register  npr . such a register  prepared state wise  would include the names of all citizens who are  usually  residents of a particular locality for six months or more. it is similar to the  ordinarily a resident  provision in the election commission rules.the ambitious npr project is supposed to have a vast database of each and every citizen  complete with demographic details and biometrics. the office of the citizen registration and census commissioner is mandated to oversee this mammoth exercise.it is set to be carried out under the provisions of the citizenship  registration of citizens and issue of national identity cards  rules       and the citizenship act     .also read  amit shah will soon overshadow modi to emerge as bjp govt s main voicethe criticismas expected  there has been a huge uproar over the modi government s plan to prepare a national nrc or a national register of indian citizens  nric . critics point out that such an identification of citizens would  expose  the names of those who are migrants on account of employment or any other exigency.this objection does not hold because the npr exercise specifically qualifies a  usual resident  as  a person who has resided in a local area for past six months or more or a person who intends to reside in that area for the next six months or more .needless to say  the demographic movement would be taken care of and the comprehensive register would be updated regularly to account for each genuine citizen. it will not be a discriminatory exercise against those who are here for work or any other emergency and carry valid permits.the assam nrc exercise has faced one big criticism   many genuine citizens of assam  who have been staying in the state for years  were left out while illegal migrants from across the eastern border made the cut. critics believe the same thing can happen in the case of a nationwide nrc too.soon after the final assam nrc list was out on    august  bjp mla shiladitya dev said he was not  convinced .  we anticipated that more than one crore bangladeshi muslims would be excluded from the final nrc. but today through this nrc  these people have become the citizens of the country   he said.therefore  before the modi government embarks on a pan nrc project  it should first plug the loopholes in the system to save itself from the embarrassment of declaring  illegal immigrants  as citizens and defeating the very purpose of an nrc.it should also initiate a debate on a pan india nrc and engage with all stakeholders  including political adversaries  to make the exercise a success.also read  adityanath  khattar want nrc in up and haryana  is india looking at another  partition  the author is a member of the national executive committee of the bjp and former editor of organiser. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




with unga   howdy modi lined up  india s diplomatic ordeal on kashmir isn t over yet
text size  a  a since the abrogation of article      the mainstream indian media has celebrated narendra modi government s move on kashmir with an exaggerated  at times even vulgar  display of triumphalism fuelling jingoistic nationalism.it s time to get out of these triumphalist fantasies.much has been written and said about india s substantial diplomatic victories and pakistan s drubbing and embarrassment in other countries and at multilateral forums. but the diplomatic ordeals are not yet over.at the   th session of the united nations general assembly  which began tuesday and will conclude on september     india will have to face pakistan s robust diplomatic offensive against its kashmir move.even the upcoming high profile event in houston    howdy  modi     will likely be a scene for protest against pm modi s visit and the clampdown in kashmir. sikh separatist groups like sikh national center and kashmiri muslim groups like friends of kashmir have come together on a common platform for the first time. according to an official in the indian foreign services and a prominent us politician of indian origin  the kashmir canadian council s alleged role in financing terror activities in kashmir is already under the scanner.these groups accuse modi of discriminating and turning a blind eye to violence against minorities in india. with us president donald trump in attendance at houston  the event can be an embarrassing moment for new delhi  raising serious questions on india s democratic credentials vis   vis kashmir.also read  j k police stops kashmir journalists from attending hurriyat  press conference we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowlosing the narrative warsix american lawmakers   ilhan omar  raul m. grijalva  andy levin  james p. mcgovern  ted lieu  and alan lowenthal   have already written a letter to us ambassador to india kenneth l. justor and paul w. jones  expressing serious concerns over the deteriorating human rights situation in kashmir. quoting prominent ngos like amnesty international and human rights watch  the letter mentions the allegations of forced disappearances  mass detentions  rape  sexual assault  and the targeted detention of political leaders.the prevailing global narrative on india s actions in kashmir since the   august move  through news reports and coverage in leading international media houses  does not put new delhi in a good light.india s performance on the public diplomacy front was rather dismal  and it could not project its side of the story   that kashmir is an internal matter and the issue with pakistan is only terrorism   as smartly and convincingly as it should have. in a reminder of how such situations have been dealt with in the past  india did poorly in the narrative war  which makes its position quite vulnerable at the unga session.on the security front also  driving home a reality check is crucial. since the abrogation of article      the efforts of the security forces and the administration have so far managed to avoid large scale civilian casualties. however  the prevailing silence also raises disturbing apprehension about the future once the curfew has been lifted and the internet connectivity has been restored.also read  pakistan threatens to escalate tensions after jaishankar s pok remarkplaying into hands of terror groupslocals residents in north kashmir and intelligence sources have told me about significant infiltration. so  it is difficult to rule out the possibility of a major terrorist strike in srinagar in pakistan s strategic calculus  putting the loc on the boil and carrying out a major terror attack or a massive civilian protest in kashmir with the unga session on will be immensely rewarding. there is also a possibility of pakistan sponsored terror groups choosing to strike in other parts of india  particularly in the southern region.moreover  the present level of alienation among the masses in kashmir is alarmingly dangerous. this could prove to be playing into the hands of terrorist groups  which seek to exploit vulnerable  disgruntled youth in assisting them with logistics and movement. besides  the political demise of moderate separatist leaders and the mainstream politicians makes the task of intelligence agencies daunting  in identifying new key members with whom they can coordinate in the event of massive civil unrest or a terrorist strike.if things are allowed to worsen  the kashmir issue may grab more international headlines in the future. in the new union territory  the mainstream and the moderate separatists   corrupt and dysfunctional they may be   have been made irrelevant and all new delhi has on its hands now is an alienated and hostile population with room for the hardened islamist militancy to grow.the author is a policy analyst specialising in counter terrorism  india s foreign policy and af pak geopolitics  and a graduate of public policy from cornell university. his book on radicalisation will be released soon by vivekananda international foundation and it has a special case study on kashmir. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




not howdy modi  indian tv channels were busy eating cake   saying hbd modi
text size  a  a it was a balmy delhi evening. lilting music filled the air   the khan market cabal  gathered around. magician like  the cnn news   anchor waved his arm to produce a knife out of nowhere.  happy birthday prime minister    he trilled   loud enough for modi to hear him far away in gujarat   and then the knife was plunged into the very heart of the soft  white sponge cake.thus did bhupendra chaubey made a cake of himself and eat it too.would navika kumar  times now   arnab goswami  republic tv  or gaurav sawant  india today  now cake bake  no  they wanted  hug and handshake  instead  in houston  times now .also read  in song and poetry  wishes galore for pm modi    father of our country    on his birthdaymodi     this thursday  nothing   not pakistan pm imran khan s nukes  india tv   not      terrorists  at the loc  cnn news      can dim the afterglow of happiness that still envelopes us.all because of that  mahanayak   zee news  who has warmed each and every indian  with the sunshine of his   th birthday.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe prime minister celebrated  modi       in gujarat tuesday  said    year old doordarshan  so did the  entire nation   added news x. but none  we wager  more handsomely than the news channels  in one voice but in many languages they sang out   happy birthday modi    happy birthday pm .those three little words bounced from channel to channel until the day long greetings rang out across continents. news india said modi s birthday had been celebrated not only in india but throughout the world we saw a group of foreign women crooning  happy birthday modi   news india  somewhere out there in wide  wide world.salaam india       watch pm narendra modi birthday special mega show happybdaypmmodi  modionindiatv https   t.co rhafs wgzt   india tv   indiatvnews  september         back home  it was party time  folks  hosted by most channels but especially the hindi ones and of course by dd news  where the anchor ensured he was invited to the right party by wearing the same colour waistcoat as modi.the birthday was a gala event. india today called it  a  made for tv celebration    modi s milestones in    eventful years  said cnn news    which unfolded in snapshots from the album of his life or  as news nation put it   narendra se namo tak .side by side  his  eventful   birthday spooled out on video.all news channels followed in the pm s footsteps as he visited different parts of the state. aaj tak  for instance  caught up with him at the narmada where he stopped for puja    narmada ne bulaya toh kheench aye modi     the butterfly park and the cactus park where he  admired each and every cactus  before posing in the foreground of the statue of unity and delivering a speech on sardar patel s dreams of  ek bharat .india tv held an immediate  emergency panel discussion on the message and the meaning of the moment.and then it was time for the matinee show   ma  matrubhoomi aur modi   zee news  featured the pm s visit to his mother.  ma  meri ma  observed republic bharat s headline almost spilling over with tears. ma ka haath ka khaana khaya    aashirwad liya   said aaj tak   heartwarming   said its sister channel  india today.  sumptuous lunch   commented india ahead news  as though it had tasted  ma ka haath ka khaana .by then it was past   pm and viewers had almost had their fill  but what of dessert  ladoos  cakes weighing hundreds of kilos  india today  were next on the menu as the bjp distributed sweets to celebrate modi celebrating    years  news india .which brings us back to bhupendra chaubey s cake cutting ceremony at delhi s much reviled khan market  cnn news   . a few party poopers refused to celebrate not until people like chinmayanand were arrested  said women s rights activist yogita bhayana.  she is not the only one who thinks we have no reason to celebrate   stated chaubey  reminding viewers that the icing on the cake hid the pm s twin challenges   that of lynchings and caste.he mentioned the tabrez ansari case  the incident of a dalit mp not allowed to enter a village and the murder of a dalit boy.before things turned sour  zee news returned to modi and his  fitness mantra . we witnessed him doing yoga and then pointing out in an old speech that there is no  elevator to success you have to take the stairs .that left news   india to speculate on who modi might have been if he hadn t been who he is. any guesses also read  butterflies  puja  a meal with mom    how pm modi celebrated his   th birthdaya pigeonas the festivities wound up  zee news welcomed a late comer  gatecrasher  a pakistani. not a surprise since zee news is invariably running after them. however  this wasn t just any pakistani  it was a pakistani  kabootar    caught at the border and sent to the veterinary hospital where they discovered it had a  phone number .could it be imran khan s  had he sent it to narendra modi on his birthday as a peace offering picture abhi baaki hai  watch the next instalment on zee news.still hungry  watch masterchef australia  star world  that has returned for season   . savour it  viewers  since this will be the last time gary mehigan  george calombaris and matt preston will taste and test the food as judges.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why modi govt s push for electric vehicles alone won t solve india s air pollution crisis
text size  a  a india s recent economic slowdown appears to have taken an unexpected victim   the narendra modi government s electric vehicle  ev  ambitions. faced with weak exports  declining car sales and widespread layoffs in the automotive sector  the bjp appears to have backtracked on its ev agenda.road transport   highways minister nitin gadkari confirmed this by stating that the centre was not setting a specific timeline for the switch to evs  and would let market forces determine the speed of the transition.the niti aayog had previously drafted an ambitious proposal to ban the sale of non electric three wheelers and smaller motorcycles by      and       respectively  and permit the sale of only evs from     .however  though environmentalists may be disheartened by gadkari s latest statement  it isn t necessarily a setback to india s air pollution battle. the niti aayog s plan  which made evs the centrepiece of the air pollution strategy  is unlikely to succeed.also read  india may finally race forward in electric carswhy niti aayog plan is doomedimproving public transport  rather than electrifying  shared mobility   is essential for better urban air quality.according to reports  the niti aayog plans to order ola and uber to electrify    per cent of their fleet by     . the bjp supported this target by only providing fiscal incentives under phase ii of the faster adoption and manufacturing of hybrid and electric vehicles  fame ii  scheme in the four wheeler segment for commercial taxis and ride hailing fleets.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin theory  the government s strategy makes sense. individual consumers are unlikely to be early ev adopters due to higher costs and range anxiety. in contrast  taxi drivers could benefit from higher fuel savings and low operating costs accrued through longer daily driving distances. besides  as uber and ola cabs mostly operate in densely congested cities  it could lower vehicular emissions.in reality  however  the bjp s strategy is flawed  since it continues to prioritise personal mobility over public transport.under fame ii  incentives are designed to support    lakh electric two wheelers  five lakh three wheelers         four wheelers  but only       e buses. this is worrying since the usage of public transport in urban india has been consistently falling from a high of       per cent in      to an estimated       per cent in       mainly due to the lack of adequate city bus infrastructure. the total number of buses has remained flat in the last five years  while the number of two and four wheelers has been constantly rising  leading to increased congestion. the fame ii scheme is likely to further this trend by incentivising consumers to opt for evs in shared mobility fleets  rather than switching to public transport.this is concerning  since a study found that ride hailing firms are adding more vehicles to the roads in urban areas  increasing traffic congestion and air pollution. this is acutely felt in india s densely congested cities  where ride hailing firms often compensate for the lack of quality public transport.although ride hailing apps are designed to promote  shared mobility   statistics show that only    per cent of riders in india opt for uberpool. the majority of riders take individual rides  contributing to traffic congestion. this also has a knock on effect on economic productivity  with india s four major cities losing     billion annually due to time lost in traffic   a broader challenge that can t be addressed by the electrification of shared mobility fleets.instead  the bjp must pursue policies that prioritise public transport  such as congestion pricing  improved bus quality  technological innovation and multi modal transport integration. as gustavo petro  the mayor of bogota  colombia  once said   a developed country is not a place where the poor have cars. it s where the rich use public transportation. also read  the real reason we re not driving electric carsevs may lead to spike in emissionsthere is a common misconception that evs are zero emission vehicles. although they don t have any tail pipe emissions  they still contribute pm emissions through brake and tyre wear and the re suspension of road dust.a study found that from            non exhaust sources  e.g. road dust  brake wear and tyre wear  were responsible for       per cent of total pm   emissions from vehicles in delhi.separately  a study in the uk found that evs tend to be    per cent heavier than equivalent internal combustion engine  ice  vehicles  due to large batteries   which could necessitate harder braking  and consequently  higher pm emissions. although there are few ev models to verify this claim in india  it should be noted that the kerb weight of the mahindra verito is      kg  while its electric equivalent  the mahindra everito  is significantly heavier at      kg.also read  two wheelers are the future of electric vehicles in indiastringent bs vi standardsmany will argue that evs can still significantly reduce exhaust emissions from ice vehicles. that would be true prior to april       the date when all vehicles in india must comply with the stringent bs vi standards  equivalent to euro vi standards .under the proposed standards  vehicle manufacturers must install filters that significantly reduce nitrogen oxide  carbon monoxide  hydrocarbons and pm emissions. after india s vehicle fleet transitions to bs vi standards  non exhaust sources of emissions are likely to assume greater importance.therefore  rather than increasing the number of  zero tail pipe emission  vehicles  reducing the number of vehicles in urban areas must be the government s focus to curb urban air pollution. this can be achieved by prioritising public transport and increasing designated cycling and walking paths in cities.the focus on evs shouldn t distract from the broader goal of reducing overall air pollution.also read  this is what cheaper and better looking electric vehicles can do for youholistic approach neededair pollution in india comes from several sources  many of which vary across different cities. a study by iit kanpur found that road and construction dust was the largest contributor     per cent  to pm emissions in delhi. in contrast  vehicles and jeeps only caused    per cent of the total pollution. despite this  the centre and the state government s action has primarily targeted vehicular emissions.the seasonal spike in air pollution across northern indian cities is a consequence of stubble burning in rural farms  transcending the rural urban divide. the who s air quality database  as of       showed that all     indian cities exceeded the prescribed guidelines for pm emissions.although aggressive ev targets help demonstrate the bjp s commitment towards tackling air pollution  a holistic approach is required to curb emissions from non transport sources.the main reason successive governments have prioritised tackling transport emissions is that they can pass on the costs of compliance onto vehicle manufacturers and  wealthier  consumers. in contrast to this strong ev push  the bjp has reportedly diluted nitrogen oxide emission norms for thermal power plants  after delaying their implementation by five years.this demonstrates that the government is unwilling to shoulder the burden of reducing emissions from highly polluting state owned coal power plants. these are located away from urban centres and don t generate public outrage.similarly  the national clean air programme  ncap  targets a       per cent reduction in pm emissions  but doesn t offer any concrete solutions or adequate funding  only rs     crore  to achieve the proposed targets.evs can certainly play an important role in reducing transport emissions  but they mustn t represent a one size fits all solution in india s air pollution battle. especially in densely congested cities  high quality public transport holds the key to a cleaner future.also read  saving the planet with electric cars means strangling this desertthe writer is the founder and ceo of rethinking public policy  a south asia focused public policy consulting firm. he writes about innovative public policy ideas on his blog.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




howdy modi and trump showcase indian lobby in us. but double loyalties can t go far
text size  a  a the  howdy modi  event in houston  texas  this weekend is a big deal. having packed the city s nrg stadium with a sell out crowd of over         the event s organisers claim that it is the largest ever turnout for a foreign elected leader on the us soil. apparently  only the pope   an unelected foreign leader   attracted a bigger crowd. the texas event will be more than twice as large as modi s previous one at new york s madison square garden. to top it all  donald trump will also join the show.there is no mistaking the fact that spectacular rallies of this kind meld international diplomacy  domestic politics and political entertainment. while i have studiously avoided analysing us politics  an astute colleague tells me that staging the event in houston is  a pretty smart move  as texas will be a swing state in the      presidential election  and modi can show trump that with his leverage on indian american votes  we can impact his re election a bit .so yes  trump s presence at howdy modi certainly highlights the strength and the comfort of the india us relationship. it also provides a very visible demonstration of the indian american community s political clout in both the united states and india. and of course  it serves the partisan and personal interests of both modi and trump.also read  trump attending howdy modi event proof of pm s growing stature   and of indians in usthe point that must not be crossedthere is no doubt that the political influence of the indian american community is growing.one aspect of it is the rise of american politicians and public officials of indian descent  in increasingly influential roles in the united states. this is unexceptionable and consistent with both the american value system   which is normatively agnostic to ethnic origins   as well as india s own longstanding posture towards the overseas community.since independence  the indian state encouraged ethnic indians around the world to be loyal citizens of their respective countries  and maintained that their links to india were cultural and civilisational  not political. this meant ethnic indians could become heads of state and chiefs of sensitive state organs like the armed forces  police and intelligence  without raising any questions about divided loyalties.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthat s where the second aspect of indian american politics   concerning the nationals of one country involving themselves in the domestic politics of the other   can become controversial. democracies accept foreigners  influence in domestic politics  up to a point. once you cross that point  there will be suspicion  resentment and backlash.for instance  the push back against chinese attempts to influence politics in western countries has been to the detriment of citizens of chinese descent. australia has cracked down on foreign influence  targeting both chinese nationals as well as chinese australians suspected of acting on behalf of beijing.in the united states  after the mood turned against china on trade and security  chinese americans are feeling the heat. according to a recent survey commissioned by the guardian   slightly less than half    .  per cent  of respondents working for software and internet companies either predicted problems or said they were already happening. across all industries  chinese nationals had the highest rates of concern    .  per cent   while chinese americans and those of other east asian ethnicities  approximately    per cent  were slightly more concerned than those who said they were not chinese or east asian     per cent . chinese nationals  who enjoyed access to academia  industry and politics in the united states for over three decades  now find themselves increasingly unwelcome  if not targeted. so too is the situation of turkish immigrants in germany and other parts of europe.if geopolitical winds change direction  immigrant communities can find themselves isolated and targeted. those suspected of dual loyalties  or worse  being a fifth column  will suffer even more. states have no permanent friends or enemies  and as the us attitude towards china shows  winds can change direction pretty fast.also read    reasons why trump called off peace deal with taliban that no one in us wanted to touchjewish american influence in us politicson the other end of the spectrum is the jewish american community and its influence over washington. leaders of the indian overseas community hold up the jewish community as an example they can emulate. while there are many parallels between the jewish american and the indian american political communities  there are also important differences  among them religious convergences  shared   th century history and dual citizenship.what might be a crucial factor in the political influence of the jewish american community is the fact that israel is a military ally of the united states. india  on the other hand  is not. so  it will be difficult to achieve the jewish american level of political influence without a concomitant   and unlikely   geopolitical alliance between india and the united states.in the amoral world of international relations  it is par for the course for states to influence the politics and policies of other countries. a realist does not ask if the instruments are good or bad  but whether they are effective or not. if the modi government believes mobilising the overseas community allows india to promote its interests in the united states  then the only question that matters is whether it is effective or not. both the modi government and the indian american community must be aware of the risks and tread carefully. a lot depends on how the prevalent nationalist  america first  political sentiment in the united states perceives the howdy modi rally.also read  the indian election story of focussing on nri voters  not doing enough for domestic migrantsthe author is the director of the takshashila institution  an independent centre for research and education in public policy. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




amit shah will soon overshadow modi to emerge as bjp govt s main voice
text size  a  a if the first term of the narendra modi government was all about the prime minister and his powerful persona  the first     days of modi  .  have unambiguously been about home minister amit shah. and if this trend were to continue  shah will smoothly overshadow modi by the end of this government s tenure.this is not to say amit shah will become a threat to the ever popular modi  or try and displace him in any way. modi will continue to remain the party s most loved face and in control personality  who can rally voters behind him like no other. but shah is very likely to emerge as the main voice of the government and the bjp  as well as the primary messenger. and may  in that sense  end up eclipsing modi.also read  in narendra modi s first     days  amit shah has become india s most powerful manshah the messiahamit shah s statement saturday about hindi and how it can unite india  which predictably stirred up a storm  was just one among the many statements the new home minister has made that have dominated headlines and ensured he conveys the primary message of this government. in this case  it was about pushing out the message of this government s majoritarian emphasis  and as a side effect  also deflect attention from the sorry state of affairs of the economy to an extent.then again  shah kicked off  seva saptah  week of service   to mark narendra modi s birthday week  where he also swept the floor of the all india institute of medical sciences  aiims  in delhi. remember the very carefully crafted optics of modi wielding a broom on several occasions in his first term look at the chain of events ever since this government won the lok sabha polls with a massive mandate and took charge in june this year. the first session of parliament was like a movie directed to suit the bjp government to perfection  and its hero  amit shah.what stood out  and how  was  of course  the move to scrap article     in jammu and kashmir and bifurcate the state into two union territories. shah brought in the bill in parliament  single handedly spearheaded it  made the necessary speeches and saw it through with an unexpected degree of smoothness. this came across as an out and out shah operation  accomplishing the bjp s decades old agenda. he even made it a point to visit jammu and kashmir within a month of taking charge  ensuring the focus remained in the right direction.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe bjp government also managed to push contentious and so far resisted bills like criminalising triple talaq  right to information  amendment  bill and unlawful activities prevention act  amendment   despite the challenge of inadequate numbers in the rajya sabha. perhaps  this was shah showing his ability to strategise  considering he is now part of government  which he never was in the first modi term and when the government always failed the rajya sabha hurdle. it ended up giving the home minister a halo of being this government s messiah  at least in terms of the ease of managing difficult operations and steering pet bills.also read  how amit shah  ajit doval managed to stun everyone on article     despite telltale signsa new shahthe amit shah of      is very different from the amit shah of       or even     . that shah was a powerful entity in the bjp  but had little overt role in the government. today s shah is a deadly mix of a pivotal party man and an equally pivotal government driver. consider the last    years   there hasn t been such a person.in the congress led upa  no minister was as powerful   exercising absolute influence in both party and government. the all powerful person in the congress party was sonia gandhi  who held no position in government  except as chairperson of the national advisory council  which had a dicey mandate . but gandhi could not brazenly and overtly speak or act on behalf of the government. she wielded the invisible hand in most activist decisions of the government. but shah now has the legitimacy and unique opportunity.in the atal bihari vajpayee l.k. advani times  the latter may have been important in both the party and government  but there is little denying that shah has surpassed him in ways more than one. he has established himself as the man who can make the bjp win even the toughest of elections and the home minister who has managed to pull off a move as gigantic as jammu and kashmir.also read  amit shah is the  prime  minister in modi cabinet   he hits where it hurtsa decisive shahnarendra modi as prime minister has limitations. the pm is the pm  bound by at least some protocol and standards to follow. if you don t believe this  look at modi s twitter handles   squeaky clean  reasonably measured and statesman like. shah  on the other hand  seems to have no such qualms. his statements can continue to be as egregious  terming  infiltrators  as  termites   promising to weed them out  and asking for updating the national register of citizens  nrc  across the country.also  modi is a more cautious  restrained politician than shah. he is less brazen and more concerned about building an image of being a statesman and world leader than much else. this gives shah an open field to push his way through as the rabble rouser with power and the necessary office  who can talk for the party and execute through the government.modi will remain the bjp s face  and shah will give him full support to be that   but not without the latter soon emerging as this government s most powerful  headline dominating and decisive voice.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




three reasons why modi took the path of social reform instead of economic reform
text size  a  a when narendra modi campaigned for the top office in       many intellectual and business elites saw him as an economic reformer. after five years  almost all of them have lost hope in that modi. instead  the modi that india got is not interested in economic reform  but in a particular kind of social reform.since       modi has invested much of his political capital in various social campaigns  and projected himself as a moralistic father figure driven to bringing order  discipline and honesty to the chaotic indian society.shattering perceptionsthis dissonance in expectations became clear to the urban elite modi supporters in the first term. liberal economist vivek dehejia  a prominent early backer of modi  castigated modi for  full blown embrace of old fashioned  centre left style populism with an  indic  twist.  he admitted that this particular liberal cohort of modi supporters had been  perhaps too na ve . another liberal columnist  sadanand dhume  who had earlier mentioned modi in the same breath as reagan and thatcher  later compared him to a  tub thumping latin american populist .here is a government  acting as a tutor and a guide  which is seeking to reshape indian society according to its vision. and what is this vision  one aspect of it is  hindutva   which has already been written about and debated much. but there is another aspect to this moulding of society. writer manu joseph considers the recent massive hikes in traffic fines under the amended motor vehicles act as  part of an on going reformation of indians. keep the nation clean  pay taxes and don t drive like a moron .campaigns such as swachh bharat and beti bachao beti padhao are not just popular with voters  but they had largely defined the modi government s first term. even the fight against corruption and tax collection campaigns were framed as social reforms  seeking to impose the value of honesty on a reluctant society.also read  in his second term  modi govt has moved from deen dayal upadhyaya to veer savarkarthe shift to social reformthere are three reasons why modi took the path of social reform instead of economic reform.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfirst  economic reforms entail a necessary erosion of power of the state. freeing the market means liberating it from the regulatory whim and arbitrary control of the government. adopting this would have gone against the grain of modi s style of governance  whose defining feature  right from his days as the chief minister of gujarat  is the concentration of power in his own hands. this power is the very prized leverage modi holds over the corporates. it is also useful in indirectly keeping the media in check  through its corporate backers.social reform  on the contrary  not only allows the state to centralise its power  but also to expand it. to enforce discipline on the society  the government needs coercive power to punish the wayward. this is why in the western conservative tradition  any kind of social intervention by the government is reflexively opposed. such intervention would  in their view  necessitate the creation of a powerful state that would then lord it over the public.in an interview soon after modi s first independence day speech in       political philosopher pratap bhanu mehta was asked about modi s emphasis on social evils and whether  a prime minister can also be a social reformer  . mehta replied that  there are limits to how much the state can alone do  because  the only way you can micromanage that  social issues  is by becoming a draconian police state. we are not a police state yet  but the raids and hefty fines unleashed on people to reform society certainly reflect a more powerful state.second  economic reforms are politically risky  because they can adversely affect certain groups of voters. an inflection point for modi s economic reform zeal  to the extent it existed  came in      with the failed land reform bill. for someone who rarely backs out of a fight  modi tamely withdrew the bill after repeatedly trying to push it through parliament. the bill risked angering displaced farmers  and after the  suit boot ki sarkar  jibe from rahul gandhi  modi realised he risked coming across as a leader out of touch with the concerns of the poor. the defeat in bihar assembly elections in november      further reinforced the need for a course correction in publicising his image as a welfarist leader. for the same reason  demonetisation  was also framed primarily as a social reform.which brings us to the third reason. the emphasis on social reform as opposed to economic reform resonates with the charismatic image that modi has constructed of himself. pursuing a popular social reform agenda  meanwhile  can be a powerful source of garnering popular legitimacy and public respect. the pro business image that modi had presented during his rise to the top  directed by the mantra of  minimum government  maximum governance   was crucial in gaining the endorsement of the business and intellectual elite in     . but it had limited appeal beyond the cloistered elite in a predominantly poor country. so  once modi cemented his position in the highest corridors of power  this image had to necessarily sublimate itself to the much more politically powerful image of an ascetic social reformer.also read  aparna sen   ramachandra guha should know sending letters to modi only makes him look goodthe cultivated  fakeer modi has always projected a persona of himself not as a politician but as a selfless social worker   a  swayamsevak   rss volunteer  who entered politics at the behest of his organisation. he has cultivated a saintly image of a  fakeer  whose single status makes him  incorruptible  for his followers.the fight against black money and corruption  crystallised by demonetisation  was thus deliberately framed as a moral crusade of good vs evil. these were not economic problems that could be fought by reforming policy or reworking incentives  they were social diseases that had to be fought by destroying the corrupt. modi even called it a purifying  yagna . even though demonetisation hurt almost everyone  the goodwill it generated for modi was immense  which was reflected in the subsequent sweeping victory for the bjp in the      uttar pradesh assembly elections.also read  new data explains the unwavering support for narendra modi despite sagging economythe legacy modi is aftervivek dehejia had lamented that modi did not  claim ownership over the reformist legacies of former pms p.v. narasimha rao and atal bihari vajpayee.  but modi is shrewdly laying claims over much more powerful legacies. to a small extent  he is claiming to continue the legacy of gandhi with the cleanliness campaign.but the legacy modi is really after is that of swami vivekananda  the man whom modi calls his  personal inspiration . modi has self consciously modelled himself after the   th century activist ascetic in both personality and thought. the ascetic  celibate reformer who spent his early years wandering in search of spirituality  and later found his life mission in revitalising hindu society and uplifting the poor.according to political scientist p.k. datta  vivekananda also served as a  model  to modi on how to thrive as an other backward class  or obc  in a  largely brahmin dominated organisation .  vivekananda was himself not a brahmin. he stood for hindu unity and upholding brahminism as an ideal   datta stated.much like vivekananda s version of social reforms  modi s social reforms are perfectly attuned to middle class and upper caste sensibilities and conceptions of society. people from these sections of india s social hierarchy focus on order and discipline  and do not touch fundamental social issues like caste inequality. after all  vivekananda  while criticising caste for its  rigidity   merely advocated lumping all castes within the fourth fold vedic ideal with brahmins at the top. similarly  modi has steered clear of making any adverse comment towards either the caste system or  brahminism . modi  like vivekananda  seems to believe in the inherent greatness of india and harks back to the vedic age as the zenith of the hindu nation. vivekananda s famous chicago speech   taking hinduism to the western world   is mirrored by modi s yoga diplomacy and spreading india s cultural capital across the world.when people style themselves as modi fans  they are not professing loyalty to merely a politician but to a beloved social reformer who is reinvigorating hindu society. when people are asked why they adore modi  many fail to name a single specific achievement of his but insist nevertheless that he is  cleaning up the country  or  setting the country right  or that  he means well  and  we trust him . it is this abstract allure of the saintly reformer that ultimately sets him apart from other politicians  and also explains why political challenges such as economic slowdown  that might sink any other political leader  seem incapable of damaging modi.the author is a research scholar in political science at the university of delhi. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




trump attending howdy modi event proof of pm s growing stature   and of indians in us
text size  a  a the announcement that us president donald trump is going to participate in the  howdy  modi   event to be hosted by the texas india forum in houston on    september must have been a shocker to many. even i had a sense of disbelief when i heard it  although it s not the first time that the head of a government would be attending and addressing an indian diaspora event to honour prime minister modi. leaders of canada  united kingdom  kenya  israel and sweden have all done it in the last five years. still  the attendance of us president makes it a very special occasion for india  the us  the indian diaspora everywhere  and for the global geo politics.the special gesture of president  realdonaldtrump to join us in houston highlights the strength of the relationship and recognition of the contribution of the indian community to american society and economy.  howdymodi   narendra modi   narendramodi  september         growing india us tiesindia us relations have grown at a strategic level under the leadership of pm modi. the strength of this relationship is that it withstood change of governance   from the democrats to the republicans. just four days before the      us presidential election results  i wrote a column arguing that india is quite capable to deal with the us irrespective of the outcome of that election. there were several reasons for this cautious optimism  and most of them are still valid today.the most crucial is india s growing geo strategic importance. india s growing economy  market  and its influential global diaspora are some of the other reasons. india us partnership is now spread across sectors  including space  defence  and agriculture. about     indian companies have invested more than     billion in the us and created thousands of jobs there. close to         indian students add    billion to the us economy. bilateral trade between the two countries is expected to reach      billion by     . no one can afford to ignore these facts.also read  in  last minute  decision  trump to now share stage with modi in houston galathe valued indian diasporafor the us  domestic politics  it s a complicated scenario as far as the indian diaspora is concerned. although there are no statistical data available  it can be safely presumed that the majority of india americans are democrats  even though the balance is slowly shifting towards the republicans. all current indian origin members of the us congress are democrats. data also shows that indian americans financially support democrat candidates than those from the republican party. republicans of late have been making concerted efforts to pull indian americans towards the right  and the affluent indian diaspora is slowly but surely responding to this call. donald trump himself  during his previous election campaign  had made concerted efforts in that direction.in short  for the first time  both the major political parties in the us are keen to attract the indian americans to their side  a situation best suited for the diaspora and for india as well. it is also important to note that the india caucus in the us congress  both in house and senate  has more than     members  with equal distribution between blue and red  indicating bipartisan support to india in the us  legislative branch.also read  modi and trump likely to unveil  limited  india us trade package this monthwe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowsorting out issuesthere are  of course  some disagreements between the two countries. trade issues dominate this list  while other issues include india s purchase of sophisticated weapons from russia and peace negotiations between the us and the taliban in afghanistan  which trump recently cancelled . but there is a strong willingness on both sides to discuss these issues  which shows that india us friendship is attaining a new level of maturity and understanding.president trump s presence in houston rally is certainly going to strengthen the india us friendship. it is likely to give a clear message to the world that india and the us stand together in their strategic partnership  in spite of differences on certain issues.at the same time  it does not mean that india is taking a partisan approach in the us  domestic politics. donald trump has been invited as the president of the united states by the organisers of  howdy  modi   event. it is noteworthy that the organisers have also invited several members of the us congress from both sides of the isle  and governors of various states. many of them have confirmed their presence.also read  at howdy  modi  event in us  pm to draw  largest ever  crowd after popepm modi s rising statureduring the previous us regime  pm modi and barack obama had developed a personal chemistry. everyone predicted  and correctly so  that modi trump relationship would be more transactional. but on certain occasions  trump has gone a step ahead of obama. he upgraded india s status on defence ties from  major defence partner  to  strategic trader authorisation    category. the trump administration has also renamed asia pacific as  indo pacific .president trump s presence at the houston event is certainly going to enhance india s stature globally and pm modi s position as a global leader. since the massive victory in the lok sabha election in may       modi and trump have met twice  in addition to two phone calls . even after taking into account the unpredictability on the other side  it is safe to assume that between india and the us  there is increasing convergence of views on several issues  and willingness to discuss and resolve contentious issues. not long after the      election victory  pm modi realised the potential of indian diaspora as an important arm of india s soft power. the houston event  with president trump in attendance  will further strengthen this conviction.the author is in charge of the bjp s foreign affairs department. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in narendra modi s first     days  amit shah has become india s most powerful man
text size  a  a over the last week  prime minister narendra modi has unveiled a cross border pipeline between india and nepal  bid farewell to his former principal secretary nripendra misra   who is believed to have led the over zealous implementation of the swadeshi agenda in the finance ministry   sat down with women who segregate plastic from waste and fed a cow at the pashu arogya mela in mathura just before he inaugurated a big project to eradicate foot and mouth disease in animals.this video  which has been viewed nearly   lakh times so far  gave way to a speech in which modi chastised all indians for being ashamed of  om   a sacred word for believing hindus  as well as the cow.  they get an electric shock   modi said  when they hear these two words.no word on economybut modi maintained a resolute silence on any ideas he and his cabinet ministers may have on fixing the economy. and since bovine analogies are in  modi can tell us how india can pull itself up by the horns  revive the  animal spirit  that former prime minister manmohan singh once spoke about  and above all push for a bull run   so as to end the stagnancy of   per cent gdp growth  the worst in six years.in fact  there was no move to speak to manmohan singh either   if there is anyone of consequence in india today on the economic front  it is him. modi may have read in the newspapers about singh s   point plan on turning growth around  but no call has gone from the pmo to the good doctor.instead  finance minister nirmala sitharaman has blamed india s millennials for contributing to the auto slump by preferring uber and ola taxi rides to buying cars. and commerce and industry minister piyush goyal  while addressing a board of trade meeting in delhi thursday  sent twitter into a frenzy when he pointed out that  maths never helped einstein discover gravity .things got so bad on social media that goyal had to issue a clarification thursday evening  saying he had  of course  been misquoted.this  then  is an example of modi s bench strength as he celebrates his first     days in power in his second tenure. the odd thing is that while modi is such a great communicator himself  most of his ministers either don t want to talk to the press   evidently  ministries have lists of favourable journalists through whom they put out positive stories   or when they do  like piyush goyal  it is to say  disparagingly   don t listen to tv  the media  .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  manmohan singh tells bjp      trillion economy a pipe dream  there s only gloom   doomrise of home minister amit shahit is also clear that the most powerful person to have emerged in modi s first     days is home minister amit shah. he is the one who led from the front in parliament when he announced the revocation of both articles     and   a. he has been emphatic about ramming through the citizenship  amendment  bill that will give citizenship to all the  hindu refugees  on the nrc s exclusion list of    lakh people. last week  addressing the   th plenary session of the north eastern council in guwahati  shah announced that  our government respects article     and will not alter it in any way .shah knows that he cannot play around with the northeast if the bjp wants to retain power in that region. with muslim majority kashmir  on the other hand  the bjp s stakes were so low that it pulled the rug from under the pdp s coalition government last year and has since worked towards implementing its nationalist agenda there.modi was fully on board  of course  on kashmir and other projects like the uapa bill and criminalising instant triple talaq. but what is significant in these     days is the manner in which shah has come into his own. there is the deference to modi because everyone knows only he can win india. amit shah will always walk one step behind the pm. but shah  it is becoming increasingly clear  seems next in line.also read  how amit shah has ruined the party for yediyurappa and bjp in karnatakanot a temporary provisioninterestingly  shah sought to differentiate between article      which gave special status to jammu and kashmir  and article      which gives several states in the northeast the full power to incorporate special tribal laws and provisions into their daily life.article     was a  temporary  provision  while article     is a  special  provision in the constitution  shah said  as he addressed the north east democratic alliance this week in guwahati  adding   yeh northeast ka adhikar hai  ise koi nahin chheen sakta  this is a right of the northeast that no one can take away  .but it s not clear if shah s aggressive tone on the nrc and the citizenship  amendment  bill is being echoed by modi  who also has to deal with the international reactions to the goings on in kashmir and assam.  i will not allow even one infiltrator either in assam or in the rest of the country   shah said at the north eastern council meeting sunday. hours later in geneva  un human rights commissioner michelle bachelet mentioned that her office was concerned not just about kashmir but also about the nrc in assam.is shah opening too many fronts for modi  should the pm tell his home minister to tone down his rhetoric and allow him to fix the economy on priority the moment of truth is upon modi. over the next few days  we will see what he chooses.also read  how amit shah  ajit doval managed to stun everyone on article     despite telltale signssubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




imran khan lectures modi on minorities. he must ban forced conversions in pakistan first
text size  a  a in the last few days  three prominent cases of girls from minority communities being forcefully converted to islam have surfaced in pakistan. these girls  hailing from sikh  hindu and christian families  have highlighted the deep rooted problem in the country  which has continued for decades now  prominently in sindh and punjab provinces. a problem that is clearly not a priority for the imran khan led government.prime minister imran khan is struggling to fulfil his grand campaign promises of making pakistan a pluralistic society. is saying that forced conversions are  un islamic  enough or can the beleaguered minorities expect a bit more from their pm after all  the pakistan prime minister is leading a moral crusade of sorts against the narendra modi government s treatment of muslims and other minorities in india  especially after the abrogation of article     in j k.while pointing fingers at india  imran khan can also consider raising voice for the minorities in his own country   that would be a good policy too. khan did say that he will show modi how to treat religious minorities.also read  pakistanis happily convert girls to islam but love marriage faces honour killing axea textbook conversion casein the last few weeks  a sikh girl was allegedly abducted and forced to marry a muslim man and then sent back to her parents  a    year old christian student was forcibly converted to islam  and a hindu girl studying bba was taken to a pti worker s house and forced to convert and marry a muslim.in pakistan  there is no law banning forced conversions. it is a religious issue with no political party willing to legislate against it  which is the state s biggest failure.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhen jagjit kaur  a    year old sikh girl from nankana sahab in lahore returned home last month  her family heaved a sigh of relief.like a textbook conversion case  the girl was kidnapped at gunpoint  forcibly converted  married to a muslim man and when the family filed a case against the perpetrators  the girl gave a  false  statement in the court under duress.jagjit s kidnapping brought much embarrassment to the pakistani government because the indian punjab chief minister captain amarinder singh took up the issue publicly. this made the pakistan punjab chief minister usman buzdar form an inquiry committee to investigate what happened. no one knows what the findings of that committee were or who was reprimanded.the governor of punjab chaudhry mohammad sarwar reached what we know as an  amicable  resolution with the girl s family and the alleged kidnapper  with the father of the kidnapper in a video saying he won t press for the girl s custody. in which civilised country can those who abduct and convert a girl on gunpoint stand tall like this  but in pakistan.also read  in imran khan s pakistan it s not the economy  stupid. it is a dreaded word keeping pm awakewaiting for justicehowever  this is not the first and definitely not the last time this kind of  justice  has been served. while the parents of a girl from the minority community are only relieved to have her back  everyone moves on to the next case.hindu girl renuka kumari  who was allegedly abducted from sukkur in sindh and forcibly converted by her muslim classmate  was released to her parents when she told the court that she wanted to go home with them. again  no action was taken against the alleged perpetrators of the crime.in another similar instance     year old christian girl faiza mukhtar s parents in sheikhupura  punjab  await justice as their child was abducted and forcibly converted at a madrassa. the family is now facing pressure from the local islamist groups to either convert or forget their child.who to blame the issue of forced conversions of young hindu and christian girls has persisted in pakistan for decades now.these conversions are rampant in sindh where thousands of girls from hindu families are picked and converted with impunity  according to the annual report of the human rights commission of pakistan. it is no secret that the dargahs and madrassas in the area work as islamic conversion factories. and  the perpetrators and the pirs of the shrines always have political backing.the blame must clearly rest with the state because there are no laws against forced religious conversions.the government of sindh backtracked on the anti conversion bill  which was passed by the sindh assembly in november     . the bill made conversion under the age of    a punishable offence even if any person converts out of his her own choice. religious parties protested against the bill and called it  anti islam . they said that the council of islamic ideology should be consulted before any such legislation is moved.in march  sindh assembly member nand kumar tabled a new bill against the conversions   the criminal law  protection of minorities  act of     . within weeks  religious groups threatened protests  and leading the charge was the notorious pir mian abdul khaliq of bharchoondi sharif  popularly known as mian mithoo  the man behind several cases of conversions.sindh has a marriage law  which sets the marriageable age at    and above  but when it comes to marriages of hindu girls  this law is never implemented. the much hyped case of sisters raveena and reena meghwar is an example of that. both girls were minors     and     yet their marriages were considered legal and the law wasn t implemented. in march  imran khan ordered action and inquiry against the culprits in the raveena reena case  but nothing has come out of it so far.forced conversion of young girls is the worst form of persecution that marginalised minorities face in pakistan.imagine one day your daughter is abducted  next you know she has a different name  you can t meet her  and she is as good as dead to you. but even death gives you closure. there is no closure in forced conversions. even the ones who are lucky to return to their families live with the trauma and shame of rape.also read  pakistani men are  losing  jannat on tiktok. and imran khan is busy targeting mediathe author is a freelance journalist from pakistan. her twitter handle is  nailainayat. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




media bashing as a political strategy works for modi. the opposition could use it too
text size  a  a on tv news debates  bjp spokespersons shout and scream  interrupt others all the time  don t let others speak. if they can t win on points  they win on noise and sheer bullying  and the anchor lets them win. a top tv anchor once told me why they do this   amit shah has a team that watches every show and decides whether the bjp  won  or  lost .  losing is obviously not an option.on channels and shows where the bjp s  victory  in debates is not guaranteed in advance  where their spokesperson may not be allowed to win through noise  they don t send their spokesperson.similarly  the congress and the samajwadi party have not been sending their spokesperson on tv news debates since    may because they feel these debates are not going to achieve anything other than opposition bashing. it s taken them long to learn this lesson  and sooner or later  all opposition parties will follow suit. what kind of a person walks into a trap any opposition leader you meet will blame the media for the state of the opposition. the complaint has some merit  though it is also an excuse for the opposition s own shortcomings. rarely has there been a politician who hasn t complained about the media. we live in an age where everyone complains about the media all the time anyway.there is little doubt that indian tv news since      has been largely a vehicle to make the bjp and the modi government look good and the opposition and liberals look bad on a daily basis. it is not agenda journalism  it is not journalism at all  but sheer propaganda. on a day when there s some big news that demands asking tough questions of the government  these channels will do debates on hindu muslim issues  for instance. ravish kumar has aptly called them  godi  or lapdog media   the government and ruling party being their guardians  or margdarshaks  as the bjp might say.also read   hindi medium type  ravish kumar proves truth matters. but does it have to be so lonely one step furtherrefusing to appear on debates designed for opposition bashing is a mere survival strategy. opposition parties must go one step further and actively campaign against  godi  media. if our democracy thrives on checks and balances  the media should also be asked tough questions.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmedia bashing has time and again proved to be politically rewarding for politicians and parties. narendra modi s rise to power was made possible partly through media bashing  these lutyens  liberals who sit and decide the national agenda  you know. pm narendra modi and the bjp still do it. during      the lok sabha elections  the prime minister lashed out against the indian express  and khan market liberals  in an interview to the indian express itself. like modi  arvind kejriwal also benefited from generous media coverage  and yet he has often attacked the media and accused it of bias.media bashing is a tried and tested formula for political success. it is a bad idea for democracy and journalism alike. but we are already in a deeply polarised political reality where the opposition being nice to the media is not going to be reciprocated.in an ideal world  all politicians should be engaging with all media  trying to sell them their spin. but if the media has decided it s not going to be a level playing field  the opposition can t just sit at home. it will have to go to the other extreme and actively project the media as an establishment it is fighting against  a political opponent  an extension of the ruling party. this is a strategy that has paid rich dividends for modi and trump and countless others  and it will work for the opposition too.the idea is simple. the media creates a narrative. if that narrative doesn t suit you  shoot the messenger. this might help convince the public  or at least the opposition s supporters  that the opposition is not wrong  it is the media that is biased. offence is the best form of defence.also read  modi and rahul gandhi were friends in      lok sabha polls   whenever the enemy was mediapoliticians have the upper handin the united states  donald trump was hardly the first politician to  run against media . attack the messenger  how politicians turn you against the media is a      book by craig crawford that reads like a tame description of this phenomenon in a trumpian world. crawford says the idea of  running against the media  began in the us in      when george w. bush  then vice president  gave a tv interview to a liberal tv anchor at a time when bush was in serious political trouble. to the interviewer s surprise  bush started attacking him  getting personal. the strategy was suggested to him by his adviser roger ailes  a man who would go on to become the founding ceo of fox news in     .crawford writes that republican politicians are not the only ones who have used media bashing as a political strategy for controlling their narrative. he writes   since the      presidential campaign  democrats and republicans learned to perfect the techniques of media manipulation. bill clinton survived a personal scandal by vilifying the messenger the reporters who uncovered his sexual affair while in office. bush s son  george w. bush  took the nation to war in iraq with little public debate  thanks in part to a muzzled press. when politicians attack the media  crawford writes  they  undermine the role of a journalist to stand in the shoes of average citizens who cannot get personal interviews with political leaders and ask the questions those leaders prefer not to answer. attacking the media works better for politicians than attacking anyone else because  crawford writes   when the news media is attacked  it was the news media itself that relayed the images and words of its own demise. the american press dethroned richard nixon with the watergate scandal and made the us change its mind on the vietnam war. but today  the press in the us  the land of the free where the ruling party can t get editors fired  is unable to make a dent in donald trump s ratings. this has happened not least because the political class has been winning the war against the media by attacking it. this is true of trump in the us and of modi in india.also read  what economic slowdown  zee news   india tv are busy giving tips on surviving nuclear attacksquestioning the questioner the media are under certain constraints. in their heart  they know what is happening. they come to me  saying we can t do much  hawa badal gayi hai  the situation has changed    rahul gandhi said in     . this charitable reading of the media is not working for the opposition.rahul gandhi was  however  on the right track when he shamed deepak chaurasia for allegedly doing a scripted interview of pm modi in which he asked soft ball questions  before doing an unscripted interview of rahul gandhi in which he asked tough questions.views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




supine opposition helps modi ignore global human rights concerns on kashmir   assam
text size  a  a where is saint vincent and the grenadines  this is not a trick natgeo quiz question at the end of which you get a prize to fly to the anglo caribbean island  all expenses paid.instead  ask yourself why prime minister narendra modi was seen smiling cheerily at the aforesaid nation s prime minister  ralph gonsalves  at a meeting of the un convention to combat desertification  unccd  that took place in noida monday.there are several answers  of course. first  india has taken over as chair of the convention of parties  cop  of the unccd and pm modi wanted to  again  put india on the world map. second  any such international conference gives the pm the chance to talk about what he s achieved in india so far  tree and forest cover enhanced by  .  million hectares since he came to power  and what he promises to do  restore    million hectares of degraded land by      .third  with       participants present worldwide during the meeting  modi knows he has the chance to mount a subliminal charm offensive  forget kashmir clampdown and assam s    lakh people excluded from nrc  see what else india is willing to do for you in the long run.also read  un rights chief asks india to ease kashmir lockdown  raises nrc list controversyunder the radarmichelle bachelet  un human rights commissioner in geneva  was clearly not listening. her opening statement at the   nd session of the human rights council monday night included both human rights violations in kashmir as well as the nrc exclusions  which she said had caused  great uncertainty and anxiety. notice that bachelet was  actually  quite moderate in her statement   and delhi seems prepared to live with it  notwithstanding some proforma noises it makes. in any case  the abrogation of article     is a done and dusted deal. the modi government isn t going back on what it did one month ago.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nownotice  too  that the suave diplomat ajay bisaria  who probably learnt how soviet diplomats played off their diplomatic enemies during the cold war with his mother s milk and was most recently india s high commissioner to pakistan until he was expelled some weeks ago  has been taking in the geneva air for the last fortnight or so since the g  meeting in biarritz  france.of course  bisaria has been meeting all the small  medium and big players in the human rights council   every vote counts. his message is delhi s message  something that national security adviser ajit doval recently told indian and foreign journalists   including the new york times  which has been quite critical of the clampdown on civil liberties in kashmir.it is certainly terrible that there is a communications lockdown in jammu   kashmir  and political leaders have been detained. but better a lockdown than more deaths in the valley  they say.moreover  at the risk of introducing unsaid humour in the serious subject of civil liberties  internet consumption isn t a fundamental right yet  and certainly not written in the constitution.the fact of the matter is that the modi government is watching  very  very carefully  on an hourly basis  the goings on in kashmir. it is aware that the curtailment of civil liberties   putting sitting mps like farooq abdullah as well as former chief ministers like mehbooba mufti and omar abdullah  as well as scores of other political leaders under house arrest   cannot be acceptable in any civilised democracy  especially not the world s largest.also read  human rights activists angry with gates foundation award to  butcher of gujarat  modisupine opposition at homebut who is going to speak up against the modi government  who has the courage to separate the issues involved in the abrogation of article     and those around the infringement of fundamental rights  not one person in the main opposition congress  which is all at sea between its interim president sonia gandhi  its former president rahul gandhi and several other satraps both old and new. forget about kashmir and the nrc  the congress has no time to protest the incarceration of its own leader  p. chidambaram. a supine opposition allows the modi government to transfer a large part of the blame outside.also read  this is why pm modi doesn t really care about internationalisation of kashmir issueangling for silence outsidethere is absolutely no doubt that pakistan is ready to stoke the fire inside the kashmir valley. this is manna from heaven for pakistan. imagine the opportunity to revive the agitation in kashmir  like it did in the early     s  and convince its people that an insurrection is in order.can india afford trouble in kashmir as well as in assam  even if the bjp gives citizenship to all hindus on its nrc exclusion list through the citizenship  amendment  bill  bangladesh is certainly not ready to take the remaining muslims back.michelle bachelet s comments on the nrc seem to have come as a surprise to the modi government   it was expecting to get a pasting on just kashmir. still  it will absorb the criticism for now  because all will depend on how things will unfold in the kashmir valley.that s why modi is now angling for a meeting with president donald trump when he goes to the us later this month. certainly  the pm will offer to buy some defence equipment as well as other heavy duty stuff  in what seems like an attempt at buying america s silence. in any case  trump s treatment of the mexicans and their incarceration on the border are hardly the textbook treatment of human rights.india will attempt to play off bachelet with trump as well as china s xi jinping  who comes to delhi varanasi next month   his own treatment of uyghurs and tibetans is for the world to see.with foreign minister s. jaishankar crisscrossing the world to explain how kashmir is an internal matter  the home front is being forged in the fire of an ambitious diplomatic exercise.both in kashmir and outside  the next few weeks will be crucial.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




on nrc s    lakhs  modi govt must not ignore sardar patel s advice on citizenship
text size  a  a assam s national register of citizens final list has opened up serious questions about india s constitutional guarantees and obligations under international law. reactions of the ruling bharatiya janata party leadership have exposed the partisan political motivations behind the humanitarian crisis unfolding in assam at the moment.the nrc process cost the public exchequer rs      .   crore and the economic costs on applicants and those excluded are substantially higher. despite claims by home minister amit shah of    lakh  ghuspaithiye   assam chief minister sarbananda sonowal clarified that the legal status of those excluded from the nrc list is not  foreigner . furthermore  prime minister narendra modi s commitment to bangladesh makes it clear that india would not be deporting the excluded to the neighbouring country. in other words  the   .   lakh nrc excluded individuals are more likely to be detained  disenfranchised and deprived of basic liberties.also read  stung by final nrc outcome  bjp readies new on ground strategy for assamreligion  the driving forcethe nrc process was accompanied by a vitriolic political campaign run by the bharatiya janata party  bjp . the nrc final list has disproved claims that assam was overrun with  millions  of illegal migrants. by itself    .   lakh is a large enough number of people who have been identified as  undocumented  by the nrc process. however  it is nowhere close to the demographic fear mongering that the bjp leadership had indulged in. while the bjp s manifesto promised a nationwide nrc  its state leadership started singing a different tune even before the final list was out.assam finance minister and senior state bjp leader himanta biswa sarma  complained that an insufficient number of people were excluded from  hailakandi  karimganj  dhubri  goalpara  and  therefore  the whole process  has become futile . if one was wondering why these specific districts were mentioned  sarma would clarify a few days later in an interview   the government of india and  the  government of assam through foreigners tribunal and citizenship amendment bill is going to take care of hindu migrants. while the promise of the citizenship amendment bill is not new  sarma s open admission of using the foreigners tribunal as a political tool is extremely troubling. of course  on the citizenship amendment bill  sarma was only expressing his party s frequent stand  the bill will ensure that those undocumented non muslims who were excluded from the nrc will be made citizens. the bill proposes to provide non muslims from neighbouring muslim majority countries indian citizenship.in other words  between the nrc and the citizenship amendment bill  only undocumented muslims will be excluded from full indian citizenship. in an exchange with me on twitter  sarma justified the bill by asking  if india does not protect hindus who will protect them  pakistan   and went on to state an old hindutva talking point   india shall forever remain a home for persecuted hindus .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  assam passes on tradition of fearing the  foreigner   millennials staunchly back nrcindia has a constitution  toothe persecution faced by minorities in neighbouring countries must not be ignored. india s record in hosting various persecuted communities and recognising their rights as refugees has been consistent. however  the bill makes two distortions to the existing framework. first  india s approach to refugees was never based on the faith of asylum seekers. second  refugees did not have a statutory guarantee to citizenship. these distortions are obviously not justifiable under the existing indian legal framework.therefore  sarma depended on hindutva semantic gymnastics  apparently  india is not a country but  a civilisation  that is a  homeland  for hindus. while the bjp may be driven by ideological needs  a law based on the fantasy that india has a civilisational obligation to hindus of the world is unlikely to stand the test of constitutional principles of equality and right to life.the bill not only violates the constitution s framework on citizenship  but also gravely attacks the guarantees enshrined in the constitution. while one has to be a citizen in order to access certain fundamental rights  the right to life  article     and protection against discrimination  article     are available to everyone. depriving or denying citizenship solely on the grounds of religion runs contrary to the basic principles of the constitutional framework.the bill is an alarming departure from the original conception of indian citizenship as based on birth  rather than lineage  faith or race. as jnu professor niraja gopal explains  the constitution makers consciously chose to avoid the  racial principle  that was followed in then apartheid south africa. vallabhbhai patel remarked   it is important to remember that the provision about citizenship will be scrutinized all over the world. as more than    lakh people stare at an uncertain future in assam  sardar patel s reminder must not be ignored. it was in this spirit that the supreme court of india directed the central government to give citizenship to chakma refugees from the chittagong hill tracts. it would be helpful to remember what the supreme court said in nhrc v. state of arunachal pradesh thus the state is bound to protect the life and liberty of every human being  be he a citizen or otherwise  and it cannot permit any body or group of persons  e.g.  the aapsu  to threaten the chakmas to leave the state  failing which they would be forced to do so.asaduddin owaisi is a member of parliament from hyderabad  and president of the all india majlis e ittehadul muslimeen  aimim . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




isro has modi support. if all projects succeed  it only shows bar isn t high  iit d director
text size  a  a so happy to see prime minister narendra modi consoling the isro scientists. this sight will always be etched in my memory. it also means a lot for the entire scientific community to know that there is support at the highest levels when things don t seem to go well. this is a very positive sign for indian science and scientists.however  if i were a scientist in isro  i would be a bit of a worried person for the following reasons. . scientists cannot work under so much of media glare. it distracts them and makes them lose focus. these activities need     per cent focus. . it causes inter personal problems in the organisations. when success  or failure  gets so glorified  who gets the credit  or the blame  becomes an issue. it can alter the work culture in organisations for worse. . we know that failure rates are going to be invariably high in space programmes. you test things on earth and expect them to work in space. the younger generation and the public in general may not appreciate frequent failures and may start to question the whole purpose of taking up such missions. . it may hamper isro s ability to take up risky projects and launch complex missions  which may have a higher rate of failure. . all communications are wireless. there is always a chance for sabotage. no wireless system can be made fully secure.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowlet s celebrate the outcomes publicly  but only after the event has concluded. raising the public expectations too much for such complex missions  before and during the event  can be counter productive in the long run. no scientific project can be designed to succeed. we can only plan for fewer failures. also  if all our projects succeed  it only means that we are not choosing the right projects and not keeping the bar high.if we want to celebrate science  there is so much happening in other institutions  too. drdo  dae  iits  iisc and many of our premier institutions are no less successful. media should divert its attention from isro a bit. it will do isro and the nation a lot of good.also read  chandrayaan   orbiter has a task cut out as isro tries to re establish contact with vikramthe author is director  iit delhi.this article has been reproduced from his facebook post. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




chidambaram won t get bail under modi rule. everyone isn t salman khan
text size  a  a when former finance minister p. chidambaram was being taken to prison thursday after a cbi court rejected his bail petition in a money laundering case  a reporter asked him   are you not worried  that you are  going to tihar jail   the veteran economist and politician s instant response was   i am more worried about our economy  it echoed the concerns he had flagged in his speech on the union budget in the rajya sabha in july. according to chidambaram  an  opaque  and  insipid  budget not taking into account the seriousness of the economic crisis was extremely alarming.almost every day  there are reports about india s economy heading towards a dangerous recession  about automobile factories and showrooms shutting down  about falling rupee and tumbling stock market and declining export. and all the narendra modi government could do is dip into the central bank s reserves to borrow   .   lakh crore because it can t manage the country s fiscal deficit any other way.and yet the dedicated supporters of narendra modi and the bjp say there is  nothing to worry   that this slowdown  which many don t even acknowledge  is  cyclical   that soon the economy will recover. their response to every news story on the failing economy is to accuse the media of  spreading panic . it is this complacency  this smugness that is more worrisome. the attempt to divert attention through headline management just never ends.chidambaram was only highlighting this concern when he was on his way to tihar jail. the former union minister can t secure a bail because he isn t salman khan  who flies kites with modi.but chidambaram isn t the only one concerned. former prime minister manmohan singh too expressed his anguish a few days ago when he almost implored the modi government to listen to sane voices and do something about the economy. in his statement listing out all that ails the country s economy today  singh sharply criticised modi government s mindless actions like demonetisation and the hastily implemented gst that have deepened the crisis. but he has been reviled so much in the last eight years or so that modi and his ministers just won t take his advice seriously   nor will bjp supporters see reason and force the government into action.in addition to the economic woes  the situation in assam after the disastrous exercise to update the national register of citizens and the unpredictable future of jammu and kashmir are just promos of the anarchy that lies ahead. the modi shah regime is only three months old  and the remaining    months are not going to be easy for everyone involved.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  the economy is india s most potent weapon  but it s losing its powerit s always the economy  stupidno analogy will explain india s current economic and political scenario blow by blow. but the united states of      and the presidential election campaign that year hold out some similarities. democrat candidate bill clinton was critical of the economic mismanagement by the incumbent president george h.w. bush  after all   it is the economy  stupid  similar to the modi government today  the bush administration seeking a second term was on cloud nine. the berlin wall had fallen in       the us had achieved a sensational victory in the gulf war  and the collapse of the soviet union in      had ended the cold war. the opinion polls were spectacularly in favour of the republicans  who previously had been in power for two more terms under ronald reagan . clinton was an unknown figure from the  nondescript  state of arkansas. and yet  all those high popularity ratings for bush didn t work for him in the elections and clinton romped home to a massive victory.the frenzy that we are witnessing over the abrogation of article      and the  liberation  of kashmir from dynastic politics  is akin to the jingoism that existed in the us then. the unprecedented second term that narendra modi won this year  with his aide amit shah planning the so called  legendary  strategies  have generated a similar heightened jingoism across the country.and just like the democratic party in the us then  the indian national congress today looks confused and defeatist.also read  nirmala sitharaman must stop stonewalling questions on slowdown. denial mode isn t an optionlessons from historyit is no one s argument that the congress will emerge victorious like the democrats in the assembly elections that will be held over the next two years. but that does not mean the political strategising and loud victory drums will help the modi government push all the concerns and debates over the economy under the carpet. it should recall how the congress was unable to draw much political mileage either from the victory in the      war with pakistan or from the liberation of bangladesh in     . the economic crisis of      could not be contained by the so called  magic  of jawaharlal nehru s legacy  he had passed away two years ago in       nor by lal bahadur shastri s leadership. in the      election  indira gandhi lost as many as eight states because it was impossible for the masses to ignore the devalued rupee  the recession  the massive industrial strikes.similarly  the bangladesh victory in      could not control the political anarchy  which had roots in the turbulent economic situation. the huge rise in the crude oil price following the      arab israeli war  or the six day war   the      drought  the famine that even caused food riots in some parts of the country  the rural distress  the growing unemployment  the ethnic and linguistic riots all added to it. this discontent led to jayaprakash narayan s movement  which managed to dent indira gandhi s charisma to an extent. when her popular appeal began to fade  she took the recourse of measures like the emergency. one of her objectives was to bring the economy on the rails.the economic crisis that forced the indian government to pledge    tonne gold to the bank of england in      can be considered as near equivalent that has made the rbi transfer its surplus of rs  .   lakh crore to the modi government now. the economic crisis of         led to complex political uncertainty  which led to yet another mid term election in     .  rajiv gandhi was killed during the election campaign. if it wasn t for the major economic liberalisation and reform measures undertaken by then  finance minister manmohan singh  under the government of p.v. narasimha rao  the situation could not have been brought under control. not only the gold that was sent to the uk came back  but a new era began and an aspirational middle class emerged.ironically  the it revolution that was kickstarted by the policies of rajiv gandhi gave rise to a new nri community that is now all cheers for modi and has no memory of the man who ushered the revolution.also read  slow economic growth is both immoral and anti national. don t ignore falling gdp rateanarchy aheadpolitics cannot be delinked from economics. it is political economy that defines stability and development. and if the economy is mismanaged or driven by populist and patriotic jingoism  then it inevitably will lead to chaos and political disorder. one does not need a jp to channelise brewing discontent among the citizens. it will gain its own momentum.the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




kejriwal is trying to be delhi s  chhota modi . now  we wait for the elections
text size  a  a delhi chief minister and aam aadmi party leader arvind kejriwal has undergone an image makeover. no more  political revolution . no  anarchy . no kangaroo courts  read pressers  to hang the corrupt damini s sunny deol style  na tareekh  na sunwai  seedha insaaf.arvind kejriwal  .  is delhi s chhota modi  a political clone of the prime minister in the national capital. watch the delhi chief minister s words and actions  emphasis on the government doing for the  first time  what  never happened  during previous regimes  conscious attempt to build a personality cult  the latest being  i love kejriwal  message on auto rickshaws that is an ingenious substitute for modi masks and chants  participatory democracy by involving people in governance  projection as being one with the poor  and  among many others  the leader who lives only for the nation.also read  to win delhi polls  aap is taking tips from modi  amarinder  nitish   jagan campaignsin wordsprime minister narendra modi often talks about fulfilling the aspirations of  azaadi ke deewanon  and of babasaheb bhimrao ambedkar.kejriwal now claims to have fulfilled  azaadi ke deewanon ka sapna  and  babasaheb ka sapna read the following comments to see the unmistakable similarity in how they consider all indians as their  own family   the     crore indians are my family   said prime minister narendra modi in april.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now every child of delhi is like my own son. no child is any less important for me than my own son. it is my duty to provide for all of delhi s people because i consider them as a part of my family   said kejriwal last thursday.look at another instance of similarity in their avowal of their lives being devoted to the country  i will not do anything for myself. i will devote every moment of my time and every fibre of my being for my countrymen   said modi in may. i try to spend every moment of my life in the service of the country   kejriwal tweeted in june.also read  why arvind kejriwal is not sheila dikshit and narendra modi is not vajpayeein imagesit s not the similarity of words only. kejriwal borrows heavily from modi s style of governance in ideation and projection  if not in substance and delivery.on friday  kejriwal invited suggestions from delhiites on how the aap government could prepare for the smog during the crop burning season. seeking public suggestions in matters of governance has been modi government s hallmark in terms of participatory democracy. the chief minister s exhortation to people to act against dengue for     weeks     o clock  for    minutes  and taking a lead by doing it on camera in his own house reminds one of a broom wielding modi rooting for swachhata or cleanliness.taking a leaf from modi s book on image making  kejriwal no longer forgets kargil diwas or the birth anniversary of freedom fighter chandra shekhar azad. he is usually one of the first politicians now to  salute the martyrs  and offer condolences every time the defence forces suffer a tragedy. the aap was quick to offer its support in parliament for the modi government s move to scrap the special status of jammu and kashmir. pictures of kejriwal as a devout hindu are all over his twitter handle  visiting akshardham temple to seek blessings of lord swaminarayan and going to iskcon temple on janmashthami to pray to  bhagwan krishna  for delhi residents and the countrymen.delhi cm  arvindkejriwal visited akshardham temple today to seek blessings of swaminarayan bhagwan. pic.twitter.com ealn xyxfv   aap   aamaadmiparty  june        after the  tukde tukde  chanting episode in jawaharlal nehru university in       arvind kejriwal did not visit the campus  whereas rahul gandhi did to show solidarity with the students. kejriwal clearly knows which side of the national security debate he has to be on.there are numerous other such instances. there is little to distinguish between kejriwal and modi. of course  one runs a union territory and the other  the nation. but that doesn t stop the chief minister from showcasing his international standing. he seeks to burnish his public image by showcasing his  productive  meetings with foreign leaders such as with the  cm of the capital city of australia .  govts of the two capital cities decided to learn from each other s experiences   kejriwal tweeted  sounding like modi after one of his international visits.had a very productive meeting with the cm of the capital city of australia  abarrmla we discussed a range of issues including health  education  infrastructure. govts of the two capital cities decided to learn from each others experiences. https   t.co a q vzyfgk   arvind kejriwal   arvindkejriwal  september        also read  kejriwal is no longer a modi basher   him backing j k decisions was only expectedwhat s behind kejriwal s modi fication kejriwal realised the people were growing weary of his refusal to evolve from an ever complaining shoot from the hip activist into an administrator who can govern. they gave a wake up call to the aam aadmi party  aap  way back in april      in delhi civic polls and the assembly bypoll in rajouri garden  a seat held by the ruling party. the bjp won the civic polls and also the assembly bypoll. the aap ended up losing its security deposit in rajouri garden. but kejriwal didn t change as he continued attacking the centre for all his failures in governance. a year later  in march april       he went on an apology spree to buy peace with senior leaders of different parties who he had accused of corruption.the ostensible reason for this was the advice from his lawyers. it was  however  more to do with kejriwal s aspiration to play a role in national politics  for which he needed to shed his self portrayed anarchist image. one could see the glow of pride and satisfaction on his face as he rubbed shoulders with sharad pawar  sonia gandhi  mamata banerjee  chandrababu naidu and h.d. kumaraswamy in the run up to the lok sabha elections. the results of      lok sabha elections came as a big jolt and a reality check for kejriwal and his brand of politics and governance.one has seen a different kejriwal after that. it has been weeks since one heard him blaming anything on the centre s refusal to grant statehood to delhi  even though he does take occasional digs at the police administration.he wants to be seen as a soft spoken  non garrulous  and humble politician who respects even his political rivals and whose focus is governance.read his tribute to arun jaitley who he had once vilified   untimely demise of former fm and senior leader sh arun jaitley ji is a huge loss to the nation. a legal luminary and an experienced political leader known for his governance skills will be missed by the country.  there were similar tributes after sheila dikshit s demise  too. the delhi chief minister has also started acknowledging the centre s contributions. he tweeted  thank you centre  after getting approval of a water conservation project on the yamuna.i am so happy to inform all delhiites that finally all approvals have been obtained from ngt n centre for our water conservation project in yamuna floodplains. thank u centre n ngt. pilot project will start soon.   arvind kejriwal   arvindkejriwal  july         kejriwal has come down from the moral high ground of a practitioner of alternative politics to becoming a mainstream politician who is prepared to use anything to win elections caste  religion  freebies  you name it. it is in this context that he is making an attempt at an image makeover.but why modi fication  first and foremost  modi defines electoral success in india today. so  there is no harm in replicating it. second  kejriwal understands how a significant chunk of the electorate is under modi s almost hypnotic spell. so  modi baiting could be counter productive  a debate that is raging on in the congress  too. people may be more amenable to a  chhota modi  in delhi in the absence of any notable and credible name or face in the union territory while  bada modi  rules the country. third  kejriwal needs to convince people that he is no longer an activist and he can govern and deliver. he may have very little to show in terms of governance  but the public perception doesn t have to be based on reality.also read  separated at birth  the curious case of  arvind  modi and  narendra  kejriwalcan chhota modi outmatch bada modi s party in delhi if you were to ask a congress leader  he or she would say  no way . what all had rahul gandhi not done to become a devout hindu like modi  he became a janeu wearing dattatreya brahmin  hopping from one temple to another. one doesn t remember the last time gandhi took up any cause concerning muslims. nothing helped him in the lok sabha elections.so  why should kejriwal s attempt to emulate modi succeed  first  because kejriwal  unlike gandhi  has the credibility of someone who is ready to govern  not someone who finds power  poison . second  the aap leader has got his politics right and knows where he stands and how to keep his supporters happy. all he needs is to manage public perception about his ability to govern. that s why he is emulating modi. it seems to be making an impact  too.for such a hardcore modi baiter  kejriwal has come a long way to become a modi clone.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




hugs  pursuit of science  speech  how modi turned chandrayaan   failure into success
text size  a  a when the history of modern indian eloquence is written  narendra modi will go down as one of our great masters of rhetoric. his    minute address ostensibly to the isro scientists but really to the indian public is a memorable feat. what modi accomplished was to turn a setback into a resounding success.let us face it. after all the hype  build up  and expectations not only in india but world over  the failure of chandrayaan   to make a soft landing on the moon s south pole could easily have been a cause of collective grief if not national mourning. it could also have damaged india s aspirations and claims to be a space superpower. only a great leader with tremendous self confidence and the capacity to move millions could prevent the disappearance of the lander from casting a pall of gloom on the nation. after all  an incredible amount of time  effort  energy  and yes  money had gone into the mission. a billion aspirations were riding on its success.pm modi  like his predecessors  understands only too well the political significance and value of success in space. indeed  science and technology has always been india s holy cow  almost beyond question or criticism. a reason of state. since the time of jawaharlal nehru  who might be credited with initiating this reverence  even putting  cultivating a scientific temper  in the directive principles of our constitution.also read  emotions run high at isro  sivan in tears as modi says   india with you  best yet to come it hardly matters if modern science is not well understood by netas let alone common indians. nor does it matter that scientific establishments stand out in splendid isolation from their surroundings  shielded from the mess and chaos of india. high walls  formidable barricades  security posts  and complicated identity checks ensure that the  unwashed  masses have no entr e into their hallowed premises.outside there is dirt  disorder and distress  inside  sanitised  air conditioned laboratories and research facilities  manned by personnel in white cloaks  often with gloves and masks. what does it matter if these same scientists do a ganesh puja or break a coconut before pressing a button to launch a rocket  or pray to benign and beneficent deities like tirupati balaji for the success of a mission  indian masses hardly care for such conundrums if not contradictions.to them  as indian politicians have realised  success in fields such as high tech  especially space  is a matter of national pride. not entirely unlike success in beauty pageants or sports. but success in science and technology works much better since high tech  rather than beauty or brawn  actually runs and rules the modern world.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthat is why the unfortunate  star crossed prime minster and erstwhile our neighbourly rival  zulfikar ali bhutto  said this of himself and his countrymen   we will eat grass  even go hungry  but we will get one of our own  atom bomb   we have no other choice   pakistan  we might be pleased to note  has almost been reduced to eating grass  but is still far from coming close to chandrayaan   s achievement  even if the latter didn t make a moon landing.also read  india would have been a dump for crackpot science had modi not nehru been its first leaderbut modi  it must be underscored  has gone farther than all his predecessors in not just juicing isro s space missions but also managing the narrative around them. in chandrayaan    he has found an unexpected ally in isro chief k. sivan. the latter is the classic illustration of a disadvantaged rural boy rising to the heights of fame and success to become not just a national hero but the poster boy of india s science and technology establishment. sivan  the humble  self made technologist symbolises the indian dream almost as much as narendra modi  a former tea seller now stellar prime minister.when sivan breaks down in modi s arms  it is truly a photo op that can launch a thousand rockets if not a thousand ships. the pm patting sivan on his back  embracing him  literally wiping away his tears sent a message possibly more powerful than chandrayaan   s soft landing on the moon  which was not to be.narendra modi told the nation that failures will not deter us from our ambitions. setbacks will not stop us from pursuing our goals. no matter what the odds  india will power its way to achieve its legitimate goals and take our destined place in the world.just so that the message was driven home  the speech that modi gave in both hindi and english in his own inimitable style spoke not only of india s civilisational journey  but even more of the romance of science. the moon  often the object of poetry and passion  became in modi s speech a symbol of india s tryst with science. embracing the moon represented india s dream of becoming a space power. what was noteworthy was the pm s unequivocal endorsement of science as humanity s best bet in its search for knowledge. there is no substitute for science  no amount of expenditure on science is thus wasted. so  science is as much the torchbearer of hindutva as it was of nehruvian secularism. some things don t change.also read  chandrayaan   s vikram lander located on the lunar surface  isro chiefmodi  regardless of who his speechwriters are  shows a comprehensive grasp of the importance of managing and massaging the narrative. no indian leader in the last    years has shown anything close to his prowess and strategic command in this regard.here it must also be admitted that the so called failure of chandrayaan   is not as much of a failure as some might think. the orbiter is still in space with reportedly    per cent of the intended experimental data and information still transmittable. moreover  other nations have also suffered several failures and setbacks before they could land a craft on the moon.india  as the newest entrant to the club  will be granted its own quota of such misfirings and aborted attempts. but think of how much has been gained by modi s turning defeat into victory. it would be so wonderful for india if he can manage the global media perceptions as well as he does the indian  especially when it comes to more contentious matters such as the clampdown in kashmir.the author is a professor and director at the indian institute of advanced study  shimla. his views are personal. his twitter handle is  makrandparanspe.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why people endorse modi s economic performance despite economic slowdown
text size  a  a in india today s mood of the nation survey  carried out in july          per cent respondents said that the narendra modi led nda government s economic performance was better than that of the upa. note that it was better only by contrast  the question was not whether it was good enough by itself. more interestingly  a significant    per cent respondents said their economic status had improved since narendra modi became prime minister in     .these results are hard to reconcile with the reality of an economy slowing down. even before the elections  we knew  thanks to a leaked report  that unemployment was at a historic high in india. there s nobody who can say that demonetisation and a poorly implemented gst did not hurt the economy. what  then  explains modi s popularity  his teflon coating  in the face of these harsh economic realities there are several factors at play. one is low inflation  which is modi s only real concern when it comes to the economy. growth and job creation are being sacrificed to keep inflation low  so that people don t complain of  mehengai  expenses    of daily necessities becoming unaffordable.another is modi s welfare schemes. indians have for far too long been used to a mai baap state. if the government is keeping inflation low and building me a house and a toilet and giving me rs       in cash every year just for having a farm  what else do i want  try explaining to people that even private sector job creation depends on the government s policies.then there is the general faith in modi  which is de linked to any issues. it is not hindutva or the economy or surgical strikes   it s just that people like modi  in the way they like a film star. modi can do no wrong. thirty five per cent respondents said modi s  strong leader  image was the reason why he won the      election. balakot was a separate point  which    per cent felt was the reason.also read  the economy is india s most potent weapon  but it s losing its powerpresumption of truthall such surveys and myriad political analyses of modi s popularity are based on the presumption that the indian voter has all the relevant facts to make up her mind in favour of modi. what this presumption misses is the role of fake news. in any analysis of modi s popularity or indian elections  you will hear people talk of a weak opposition  a co opted media  hindutva  low inflation  welfare schemes and so on. you won t hear of people talking about fake news and misinformation spread through whatsapp and other social media  often beyond our sight.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhat makes people give a thumbs up to modi s economic performance when the economy is actually in a bad state  for many liberals the answer is hindutva. but what if people don t think the economy is actually slowing down  what if people think the economy is doing well. this comes through in the india today mood of the nation survey. sixty six per cent respondents said nirmala sitharaman s first budget was good enough to help make india a    trillion economy in the next five years. that s a thumbs up to a budget so bad that the finance minister has since gone back on many of its key proposals.the economic slowdown has reached such worrying proportions that even data fudging and the government s denial is not hiding it. modi won t utter a word on the economic slowdown because why admit a problem when it s easier to convince people that there is no problem it s not that people are not experiencing unemployment   survey after survey since demonetisation has shown unemployment as the top concern for the public. in the mood of the nation survey     per cent thought it was the top concern. the missing link is that the people don t blame the modi government for unemployment. modi can do no wrong.during the elections  you could find people saying modi was taking the nation to great heights  even as the opposite was happening to the economy. in east uttar pradesh  a villager told the indian express   india is more respected in the world now. from   th  it has come to fourth spot. give modi five more years and we will climb to number one.  number   in what exactly  never mind.also read  to avoid sinking to     s levels  modi must take direct charge of economic policyblame everyone but modias the economic slowdown becomes harder to hide  as even the doubtful gdp says we are growing at only   per cent  shareable social media  creatives  have been screaming  reality check . not just india  the entire world is suffering an economic slowdown  they say. it s the us china trade war that s the reason. in other words  why blame demonetisation or gst or modi  they point out the low growth rate of european countries. good luck explaining to the masses why that s not comparable  or how demonetisation killed the india growth story even while the global economy was on a high.  while the world is headed for recession  critics only find pm modi to blame   one creative says.we all get such messages on whatsapp. we don t realise the scale of this whatsapp propaganda. there are     million indians using whatsapp and almost no one s whatsapp is free of political content arriving as if on its own.one such  forward  doing the rounds says  often heard nowadays that  indian economy is struggling . sit back   dispassionately think  is the economy really struggling or are business models struggling  some food for thought    car sales are going down  but ola   uber are rising.   restaurants are going empty  but home delivery is rising.   tuition classes are not getting students but online studying is rising   traders are struggling but online market sites and reference based direct selling are breaking all records in sales.   old commission based businesses are snivelling  but online services  at low cost  are finding takers.   cell phone bills have reduced   internet penetration is increasing.   stable  read  govt jobs   are dwindling but  start up  jobs offering equity   flexi work time are expanding.   jobs seekers are reducing but job creaters are on the rise.working    hrs a week for    years is trend of past. working for few years and spending quality time in contributing to society is the trend the bitter truth is what we are experiencing is a transition phase and any transition is painful for the  well set    the masters of the past .it s challenging for those whose business models are based on ancient data .sunil gavaskar style    not out cannot win one day matches today. we need a rohit virat style today.it s a mystery for those who have never looked beyond traditional methods or have assiduously resisted change of any kind.economy is not struggling business is changing.changing constantly..   sic  also read  fall in gdp growth needs to be reversed before it becomes a sustained downward spiralcontent is king  distribution is godthis is typical. blame the world. blame the people. blame businesses for not adapting. blame the changing environment. blame everyone except the government. the scale and influence of such propaganda is so huge that you can meet people in chai shops and trains who will repeat it word for word. whatsapp propaganda makes every modi voter speak like a bjp spokesperson.fact checking  leaving whatsapp groups or reeling from such posts is not going to fight this propaganda. fighting it will need distribution power   someone who has the ability to create and manage millions of whatsapp groups.views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




to avoid sinking to     s levels  modi must take direct charge of economic policy
text size  a  a no one can accuse the second modi government of inaction. if anything  its first     days have seen frenetic activity   historic action in jammu   kashmir  lots of legislation passed through parliament  and lots of summitry by the prime minister   bhutan  g   the uae  russia  etc. coming up soon is china  after an address to the un general assembly. also worth noting is the critical difference in tone and approach that has resulted from the replacement of the late arun jaitley by amit shah as no.   in the cabinet.for all that  one is inclined to go back to bill clinton s campaign slogan   it s the economy  stupid   not that the economy has been ignored in these past     days  far from it. there is the mega merger of government banks  the budget and further opening up to foreign investment  while some of the new legislation is economic in content  two new labour codes  and an amendment to the bankruptcy law. on its part  the reserve bank has announced two rate cuts. yet  other than the finance minister  the rest of the government in new delhi seems strangely disengaged with macro economic policy issues. this is hard to understand when the economy faces an escalating employment problem  a crisis in farming  stagnation in manufacturing  and slack exports.clinton s old slogan did nothing more than state the obvious. but sometimes  like today  the obvious needs to be stated. especially when modi s latest economic initiatives  like his earlier ones  involve the spending of government money on handouts for farmers  a government funded health insurance programme  and the like. with the slow economic tempo undermining tax revenue assumptions for the second year in a row  the money required for these and other programmes may simply not be there.also read  modi govt s bank bailouts seen distracting focus from growth slumpthere are larger ramifications to economic under performance. in a changing world order where nation state leviathans seek free rein  the country s external heft flows directly from its strategic projection and the future promise of its markets. if growth stalls  the country is less likely to be viewed in the region and further afield as a natural foil to china  or in economic terms  as the next china. bear in mind that these perceptions lay at the heart of the us  re engagement with india  beginning with the nuclear initiative under the second president bush.if america decides now that india  has been over sold   as some observers in washington are beginning to say  there will be a diplomatic cost. india may no longer get carve outs from sanctions regimes  and other countries may not automatically take india at its word  in the face of pakistan s protests  on the kashmir issue. meanwhile  the defence forces lose out relatively because there isn t enough money for the acquisition of submarines and destroyers while china s navy expands at a frenetic pace and expands its presence in the indian ocean. that reduces india s utility as a strategic partner.on top of this  if our businessmen  ever in search of protective tariff walls  persuade a naturally nationalist government to stay out of the mega trade deal that is the rcep  regional comprehensive economic partnership   then india will have turned its back on the most dynamic part of the world economy. on its part  the government seems to have decided that  make in india  will work only by aiming at import substitution   which usually translates into higher tariffs. if the history of world trade and economic performance  and india s own policy making history  says anything at all  it is that this strategy does not work in the long run.all of this makes it compelling that the key personages in the government  and that includes the prime minister  engage directly and actively to prevent the current downturn from morphing into     s level growth rates. modi in particular needs to put aside his lack of engagement with macro economic policy  and develop a coherent understanding of how the different elements of a revival strategy  different from a  package  of announcements  mesh together   and then to stay the course on what is required to be done  because structural issues don t change with the season.also read  modi s bank mergers have come too late to avoid an economic crisissubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




act east to act far east  why narendra modi s vladivostok trip is such an ac
a prime minister narendra modi is back home from vladivostok  russia  having announced a billion dollar credit line to a former superpower  even as former home minister p. chidambaram spent his first night at tihar jail and kashmir just completed a month in lockdown after the abrogation of article    .modi prides himself on breaking new frontiers  creating new paths and basically  going where no indian has gone before. he just visited tiny bahrain   no indian pm has ever been to bahrain. he is out again  soon  to the us  where he will attend the un general assembly and visit the mother of all indian diaspora cities  houston. as of september       the pm has travelled across six continents. only antarctica is left.but even the peripatetic modi may not have realised why his vladivostok trip is such an ace. of course  there is the welcome fragrance of vindication  of ridding oneself from the east india company syndrome and lending to a country whose per capita income is higher than that of india.there is the clever sloganeering of converting india s  act east  policy into  act far east .also read  how india can benefit from a mineral rich but sparsely populated russian far eastit s about economyand there is the hope that the tied credit will spur despondent indian companies back home to kickstart manufacturing and do business with a part of the world that is so rich in minerals that it is floating on almost every element that exists on dmitri mendeleev s periodic table  first published in     .kickstarting the home front is key to his survival   modi knows that. at   per cent  the gdp is at a six year low. it is more than likely that this is the reason why the pm got rid of his principal secretary  nripendra misra  because he was interfering in financial matters far beyond his ken. since he was seen as modi s favourite bureaucrat   remember the ordinance modi pushed in parliament in his first few weeks in office in      to retain him    the finance ministry was hardly able to refuse him.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbut if modi s second tenure has to work  then he has to turn around the economy. asking misra to go and likely replacing him with his other favourite  p.k. mishra  is a signal to the business community that modi is looking for help.perhaps  some of that may come from modi s vladivostok trip.also read  modi and putin tell the world india and russia still need each otherthe chinese threatrussia s far eastern federal district is nearly   million sq km in size   india  with  .   million sq km  is less than half the size. the federal district consists of    regions  including the jewish autonomous division  each with their own flag   a reminder from putin to modi that having your own flag in jammu   kashmir or in karnataka  where some independent minded people want to resurrect another reminder of their distinct identity  is hardly a challenge to a strong centre.it is only when the centre cannot hold that things fall apart. whether or not he is a history buff  modi knows the present well. he knows that the perception of strength is important in a country as diverse as india   and that this is where the ageing but highly respected manmohan singh  who opened up the economy and gave india possibly its highest growth rates  could still score one up on him  even in a party as rapidly falling apart as the congress.certainly  the reference to history is important and it s impossible not to be charmed by the     year old cycle. the second opium war came to an end in        it had not only put conditions on opium trade from india to china  but forced the qing dynasty to sign humiliating treaties with russia  britain and france. it is the convention of peking in      that gave china and russia their border in the far east.the chinese never forgot  of course. and as it grew to become the shopkeeper to the world in recent decades  china sent expeditions to the russian far east  threatening to excavate the raw minerals the region had in plenty. a nervous putin quickly put in place the eurasian economic union   it has only four other countries as members so far   and insisted  much like catherine the great did in the   th century  that russia was also a pacific power.what is modi s plan enter narendra modi. if india can send a few thousand farmers to take over vast acreages in canada  if indian big business like the adanis can be ambitious enough to build a rs        coal mine in australia   and if russia s rosneft led consortium can take over essar oil  perhaps modi and putin could invite the ambanis to further their oil based petrochemical industry in the russian far east in blagoveshchensk  which is located on the banks of the amur river and is the administrative centre of the amur federal subject and is    hours by road from vladivostok  putin modernised a triumphal arch first built in     . the arch has a plaque proclaiming   the earth along the amur was  is and always will be russian . but on the other side of the amur is the chinese city of heihe   both are part of a free trade zone. putin knows the chinese are coming.whether or not anything comes of modi s vladivostok trip  fact is that some out of the box thinking has taken place in south block. fluke or deliberate  the timing is perfect. backed by putin s welcome  modi goes to the us later this month and welcomes china s xi jinping next month.as for domestic matters  like jammu   kashmir and the  jail  sign over p. chidambaram  home minister amit shah seems fully in command.also read  in modi era  france has replaced russia as india s new best friendsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




supreme court s handling of kashmir habeas corpus more worrisome than modi govt s clampdown
a new and somewhat questionable kind of jurisprudence is being set by the supreme court of india for some time. the court of the last resort should be brazenly upholding citizens  fundamental rights and protecting them from unconstitutional actions of the state. but of late  the supreme court has been found wanting in its response. not only has it opened itself to the charge of acting as an arm of the government  but it is also unwittingly sending out a wrong message to the lower judiciary.the latest example of this is the manner in which the supreme court has heard writs of habeas corpus concerning the detention of political and non political persons in kashmir after prime minister narendra modi s government abrogated article     that granted special status to j k.in dealing with the communist party of india  marxist  general secretary sitaram yechury s habeas corpus petition challenging the illegal and unconstitutional detention of his party s j k leader mohammed yousuf tarigami  the supreme court bench headed by chief justice ranjan gogoi imposed conditions even while allowing the leader to visit kashmir and meet his ailing colleague.according to the order passed on    august  yechury could only meet tarigami and not indulge in any political activity. the court also asked yechury to file a report on his return. we make it clear that if the petitioner is found to be indulging in any other act  omission or commission save and except what has been indicated above i.e. to meet his friend and colleague party member and to enquire about his welfare and health condition  it will be construed to be a violation of this court s order   the bench  also comprising justices s.a. bobde and s. abdul nazeer  ordered.why not  yechury heads an important  mainstream political party in the country and  unless the government shows cause that his intended actions could lead to law and order problems  there shouldn t be any condition on what he can or can t do.also read  why an sc judge s dissent    years ago is relevant to kashmir clampdown todaywe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis petition was earlier with the bench of justices n.v. ramana and ajay rastogi  which ordered on    august that the case be listed  before an appropriate bench  as per roster .it should be a cause for worry if the supreme court  which is often criticised for spending too much time on frivolous cases that don t necessarily involve a constitutional issue  takes five days to hear a writ of habeas corpus. and that too one  which involves the important question of citizens  life and liberty. what can be more important and urgent for the supreme court in a democracy than deciding whether a citizen s fundamental right to life and liberty as granted under article    of the constitution has been violated or not by the state  even during an emergency like situation  the state can t restrict people s freedoms without following the due process of law.but even if the court were to be given the benefit of doubt with the usual riders like the security situation in kashmir and sovereignty  the court should have assumed its constitutionally mandated role as the protector and defender of the citizen s fundamental rights rather than leaving it to others. failure to do so amounts to the court abdicating its duty under the constitution.a writ of habeas corpus involves determination of whether a detention is legal and if due process has been followed. the court isn t expected to go into the issue of the alleged crime of the detenue.thankfully  the supreme court didn t ask yechury and others to prove their locus in filing the habeas corpus.also read  beyond article      we must ask if the j k bifurcation was constitutionalwhen freedom is conditionalin       a constitution bench hearing the case of chiranjit lal chowdhuri versus union of india and others expanded the scope of who could approach the supreme court if somebody s rights were violated. the court held that not just individual citizens or groups but corporate entities too could do so. the bench also ruled that the supreme court  drawing its powers from article     can issue directions or orders or writs like habeas corpus  mandamus  prohibition  quo warranto and certiorari  whichever may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this part.the normal process in a habeas corpus case is for the court to order the production of the detenue  verify for itself if the detention is legal and  if found violative of the constitution  quash the detention.by asking yechury to travel to kashmir  meet his colleague but not indulge in any political activity and then return and file a report  wasn t the supreme court breaching its mandate here s a hypothetical situation for the court to examine or ask itself  what if  in its report  yechury had claimed that tarigami was being tortured in detention  what would the court have done then more importantly  now that yechury has purportedly informed the court that the situation in kashmir is  contrary to  the narendra modi  govt s claims   what will the court s next course of action be in ram manohar lohia vs state of bihar  a constitution bench ruled that even in a situation where an emergency may have been imposed or where law and order is cited to detain a person  detention orders can be challenged through a writ of habeas corpus   if the detention order was passed in a mala fide manner or was otherwise invalid.in       the supreme court noted in the case of rudul sah vs state of bihar  while awarding compensation to an illegally detained citizen   in the circumstances of the instant case the refusal to pass an order of compensation in favour of the petitioner will be doing mere lip service to his fundamental right to liberty which the state government has so grossly violated. also read  freedom of press supreme  but can t be one way traffic  supreme court observessetting another bad examplethese are the examples that the supreme court bench led by cji gogoi should have followed and  if it deemed fit  expanded on as it heard yechury s petition. instead  the court chose to follow the case of additional district magistrate  jabalpur vs s.s. shukla.the case is regarded as a blot on the supreme court of india s judicial history. the majority on the constitution bench allowed itself to be completely swayed by the specious arguments of then indira gandhi government in curtailing the liberty of citizens during the emergency. forty three years later  another bench allowed itself to be convinced with the imperfect logic behind the state s actions to not side with the victims.and the supreme court s treatment of the habeas corpus last week is certainly more worrisome than the indian state s actions  because it sets the tone for the rest of the judiciary across the country.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




indians voted for acche din under narendra modi  got absurd din instead
text size  a  a indians who voted  twice  for acche din have got absurd din instead. a high court judge has a problem with the books an accused reads.be it tolstoy s war and peace or biswajit roy s war and peace in junglemahal  people  state and maoists   we live in an era where they have already judged the reader by the title of the book. and of course  their focus is on  war  and not  peace .this is happening not just in india. if we look at the world with a kind of philosophical detachment  it seems the theatre of the absurd is playing out everywhere  in full force. not only politics  our social life too seems to have been engulfed by hilarious absurdity.ironically  the theatre of the absurd movement was born as a form of protest against the smug  orthodox and authoritarian governments. but what if the government and its institutions themselves become theatres of the absurd be it us president donald trump demanding russia s re inclusion at a g  dinner in france  or prime minister narendra modi s cloud cover comment after balakot airstrike  or a high court judge questioning activist vernon gonsalves  reading habits  a strange tragicomedy is upon us. the predicament is tragic  but the manifestation is comic. as nell in samuel beckett s endgame says cynically   nothing is funnier than unhappiness  it is the most comical thing in the world .we do not miss george orwell or bertolt brecht because their roles have been usurped by the authorities themselves who run the theatres of the absurd   be it in media  judiciary  police  government or even bollywood.also read  junglemahal is a book on peace process with maoists. but it frightens the indian statewe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowscience and the absurdthen  there is hrd minister ramesh pokhriyal who has conclusively argued that research on atoms and molecules was first conducted in india by charaka rishi.last year  then minister of state for hrd satyapal singh said that darwin s theory of evolution was  scientifically wrong . our ancestors  he said  never saw  an ape turning into a man .some bjp leaders have publicly declared narendra modi as an incarnation of lord ram. and modi himself has gone on record to state that ancient india had the knowledge of genetic engineering and plastic surgery.the term  theatre of the absurd  was formally coined by well known european critic martin esslin. he defined it as  an attack on the comfortable certainties of religious or political orthodoxies. it aims to shock the audience out of complacency  to bring it face to face with the harsh facts of the human situation  it is a challenge to accept the human condition as it is  in all its mystery and absurdity and to bear it all with dignity  the theatre of the absurd does not provide tears of despair but the laughter of liberation .if the beef related lynching incidents and the communication lockdown in kashmir bring tears of despair  then the high court judge s observations and the cbi officers scaling the walls of chidambaram s house generate laughter of liberation.also read  once the amit shah of upa govt  tables have turned for chidambarammedia playing its partthe electronic media  read tamasha tv  and the social media have reached a point where it is difficult to distinguish between absurd and real news. the credibility of both the platforms has reached the nadir.prime minister s appearance on discovery channel s  man vs wild  or the sensational bonhomie between narendra modi and donald trump at g  is dished out as primetime news. the  line of control  between the real and absurd is violated on every newshour.while the media has been quick to celebrate modi trump bromance  we are yet to see any tangible outcome. the us in general  and trump in particular are keeping both india and pakistan at an arm s length.but arnab goswamis  rahul shivshankars and navika kumars of the media world do not want to wait before announcing victory.this is how the theatre of the absurd is playing out now. it is no longer a protest against the powerful  but a submission to the powerfulalso read  crocodile lover  fakir  now a man of wild for bear grylls   modi and the power of makeoversthe author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in his second term  modi govt has moved from deen dayal upadhyaya to veer savarkar
text size  a  a in the first two months of their new term in office  the narendra modi government has hastened to fulfil the bjp s core ideological vision faster than in its entire first term. the ideological lodestar of the first modi term was the palatable  faux gandhian hindutva ideologue deen dayal upadhyaya. but in its second tenure  the modi government is already deep in the embrace of the unabashed  aggressive hindutva embodied by v.d. savarkar.it is perhaps not incidental that savarkar has suddenly emerged as the flavour of the season  with a couple of books  a flurry of laudatory articles and a controversial bust of him installed overnight outside the delhi university.the bjp has stood by three core issues since its inception  instituting the uniform civil code  revoking article     and building the ram mandir in ayodhya. in its first term  the modi government mostly steered clear of all these three issues  and let the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss   through its proxies  file public interest litigations  pils  to take these issues to court. the government presented itself as primarily a pro poor  welfare oriented government  rather than a government with a hard line hindutva ideology. deen dayal upadhyaya s name was plastered all over the posters of government welfare schemes  peppered in key speeches of the prime minister narendra modi and president ram nath kovind  and his birth centenary was officially celebrated with a lavishly funded and prolonged nation wide campaign.this can be explained with two reasons.first  the sangh parivar understood that the      mandate was at best a partial ideological victory as the country was not yet primed for fully embracing the hindutva ideology. so  the primary concern was to consolidate the gains the bjp had made among the poorer and  backward caste  sections of society  and make these a more durable electoral base. rss chief mohan bhagwat in october      had explicitly stated that the bjp and the rss would bring in new national heroes to help the party gain acceptance across society. the egalitarian ethos of upadhyaya s integral humanism  encapsulated in his concept of  antyodaya  meaning the  rise of the last person  was thus foregrounded as the ideological basis for a slew of poverty alleviation measures. the bjp also made constant attempts to appropriate leaders from other ideological streams such as b.r. ambedkar  madan mohan malviya and mahatma gandhi.the imprint of gandhian principles of  sarvodaya    swadeshi  and  gram swaraj  on upadhyaya s mind lent his version of hindutva broader legitimacy  and thus made him a more suitable vehicle for transmitting the message of the modi government in its first term. in fact  this was precisely why upadhyaya was also foregrounded by the bharatiyajana sangh in the     s  which was to pave the way for an alliance with the more secular janata party.as scholar thomas blom hansen writes in his book  the saffron wave    deen dayal stuck to  golwalkar s organicist thought  but also  supplemented it with gandhian discourse and articulated these in a version of hindu nationalism that aimed at erasing the communal image of the jana sangh in favour of a softer  spiritual  non aggressive image stressing social equality   indianisation  and social harmony. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowon the eve of his birth centenary  pm modi bracketed upadhyaya with gandhi and lohia as the  three great men  who  have influenced indian political thought in the last century . the omission of the likes of m.s. golwalkar and savarkar from this line up was deliberate. modi even said that he was inspired by gandhi and upadhyaya s thoughts when he had declared that his government will be dedicated to serving the poor after being elected as the prime minister in     .also read  savarkar wanted one god  one nation  one goal. modi has fulfilled his dream with kashmir movethe road to fulfilling its objectivesthe second reason is that the bjp simply did not command the overwhelming political dominance to ram through sweeping ideological changes. when the bjp came to power in       it had a meagre    rajya sabha mps out of a total strength of    . today  that number has almost doubled to   . along with its allies  the bjp commands     rajya sabha mps  just   short of the majority mark  and needs only the co operation of a few smaller parties to push any of its agenda in the house. moreover  at the beginning of the modi government s first term  the independent institutions of the state had not yet been bent to the will of the executive. large sections of the media had not yet reduced themselves into propaganda wings of the government.now that those constraints to executive power have been lifted  a more ideologically assertive government has taken shape. the appointment of hardliner amit shah as home minister in place of the more compromising rajnath singh was the first sign of this transformation.in scrapping article      the bjp has already fulfilled one of its three core ideological objectives  and by passing the triple talaq bill  it has taken a major stride towards realising the second one   the uniform civil code. the citizenship amendment bill seems to be the next agenda on the anvil  and it would not be surprising if the executive pre empts the judiciary to force through the construction of the ram mandir.as savarkar s biographer vaibhav purandare recently wrote in an article titled  india reshaped to savarkar s will   it is worth quoting him   who is the inspiration behind the narendra modi government s audacious moves to project india as a hard hindu state  it is undoubtedly vinayak damodar savarkar .more than modi or amit shah  the ghost of savarkar is steering the government of india .savarkar was a proponent of hard power and often equated ethical concerns with weakness   something that the removal of article     from kashmir showcased.political scientist rudolph heredia contrasted gandhi with savarkar on their approach to ethics. while gandhi was  uncompromising in his rejection of unethical means  no matter how lofty the objectives  in pursuing his ideological goals  savarkar  unhesitatingly privileged the most effective means regardless of ethical concerns   that seemed to him  mere distractions .savarkar argued that  virtue and vices are relative terms  and if a particular course of action serves the interests of the hindu society  then it automatically becomes virtuous. this led him to take morally abhorrent positions such as justifying the use of violence against women and children and even justifying the use of rape as a political tool.savarkar lamented that pacifist buddhism had emaciated hinduism and hence called for the need to  hinduise all politics  militarize hindudom . the narrative of  revenge  and  conquest  that has permeated right wing discourse on kashmir also echoes the exhortation of savarkar to the hindu mahasabha  let us re learn the manly lessons they taught us and our hindu nation shall prove again as unconquerable and conquering a race as we proved once when they led us  conquering those who dared to be aggressive against us  .also read  veer savarkar  the man credited with creating hindutva didn t want it restricted to hinduswhat savarkar s centralisation foretellsthe centralisation of savarkar portends the deepening marginalisation of indian muslims and christians from the body politic  the immutable  subordinate  other  in savarkar s ideology. at a rally in kozhikode  modi had quoted upadhyaya as stating that  muslims should not be treated as different people. do not reward them  do not rebuke them  but empower them. muslims should not be looked down upon nor should they be seen as merely a vote bank. consider them your own. however  savarkar s very definition of nation and indians excludes muslims and christians from the consciousness of the country as their  punyabhoomi   holy place  resides outside india. as prominent scholar tanika sarkar puts it  savarkar s formulation makes  nation and hindus synonymous  and thus  reserves citizenship for hindus alone .if the ascension of savarkar as the guiding light of india s governance paradigm is indeed complete  the substantive citizenship rights of muslims and christians   like article       might well erode and become history soon.the author is a research scholar in political science at the university of delhi. views are personal.also read  modi s hindutva  .  written on varanasi walls  temple restoration  not mosque demolitionsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




pm modi needs to make an emotional appeal to kashmiris   like vajpayee and manmohan did
text size  a  a at the joint press conference with us president donald trump on the sidelines of the g  summit in france  prime minister narendra modi conveyed one message unambiguously. he made it clear to america and the world that all issues between india and pakistan are bilateral and ensured the international community accepts india s viewpoint on abrogation of article    .in the three weeks between jammu and kashmir losing its special status and the modi government making the international community  barring china  endorse its stand  the developments prove that india s short term strategy has been very successful. the situation on the ground in kashmir is under control. the unprecedented deployment of the security forces  the valley s curfewed streets  and the  information blackout  have ensured there are no mass protests   violent or peaceful   and there is no loss of life.but while the modi government has achieved its immediate political aim  india s long term strategy remains unclear. except for vague political rhetoric  one has heard little about the government s plans for kashmir in the long run. have we reconciled to the idea of controlling the territory of j k without the  soul  of its people if the modi government intends to win the hearts and minds of kashmiris  then it has an endless  to do  list to follow  which has been discussed ad nauseam. here are some recommendations based on my experience.also read  demonetisation  gst  now kashmir. modi govt doesn t think beyond the first stepus versus them people of india  versus the  muslim population of jammu and kashmir  is the predominant narrative. the politicians  the public and the media have fallen prey to it. little or no distinction is made between the kashmiris and the terrorists. this narrative is against the norms of a civilised society.of course  violence in jammu and kashmir to a large extent has been the principal cause for tensions  but are we going to punish  .  million people for the crimes of     odd terrorists  if this narrative percolates down to the armed forces  the early signs of which  in my view  are discernible  the consequences will be horrendous.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis narrative has to change. as a nation  we cannot lose our moral compass.appeal to emotionsit is empirical wisdom that no matter how aggrieved the people may be  an emotional appeal by the highest authority can bridge the gap to a great degree. that is exactly what former prime minister atal bihari vajpayee and his successor manmohan singh did  paving the way for the situation in kashmir to be brought to near normal by     .so far  the modi government hasn t  either in its first tenure or in the second  taken any such action. prime minister modi should go beyond a televised gesture and make a direct emotional appeal to the people of jammu and kashmir explaining his political strategy  plans for their development and well being  and his approach to reconciliation.also read  the sheer folly of modi govt s media managers plotting a kashmir is normal storydevelopment plansthe short term and the long term development plans must be spelt out in concrete terms detailing when and how they will be carried out instead of being simply announced as rhetorical promises.the short term development plans and welfare measures must fructify fast and their impact must be visible for the people to see in the near future.rope in the youththe key to jammu and kashmir s future are the post      youth who have seen nothing but violence. many of them are educated and aspirational. lack of jobs and the prevailing circumstances have resulted in frustration and  anti national  sentiments among the youth. when these sentiments fester for far too long  the gun is only one step away.as a nation  we must take affirmative action to employ the youth of jammu and kashmir. the modi government must guarantee them the right to work and launch a stipend scheme as per qualifications as soon as possible.also read  modi govt s kashmir crackdown is damaging india s image abroadeducation and healthgood education and healthcare are basic rights of the country s citizens. improvement in both never fails to touch the hearts of the people. we must transform these two sectors in jammu and kashmir and make it a model for the whole country.a large segment of the population has been psychologically affected by violence for years. this problem has to be specifically addressed.national effortlet there be no doubt that jammu and kashmir or any part of it is not going anywhere. it was and will remain an inalienable part of india. the choice is ours whether we would like to keep it with or without the  hearts and minds  of the people who live there. this is not the time for triumphalism but for reconciliation.if we the people and our elected government show the wisdom and the will  jammu and kashmir can be a model for the rest of the country in five years.lt gen h s panag pvsm  avsm  r  served in the indian army for    years. he was goc in c northern command and central command. post retirement  he was member of armed forces tribunal. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




new data explains the unwavering support for narendra modi despite sagging economy
text size  a  a by last week  consensus had built that the economy was in trouble  even among many otherwise right leaning economists and commentators. on one side  a clamour grew for concrete and actionable solutions  starting with an acknowledgement from the government that it was in economic trouble. on the other hand  a question that has troubled political analysts since the      election resurfaced   does any of this matter electorally  or is the narendra modi mandate recession proof the economy is certainly on people s minds. the cvoter tracking poll interviews       respondents across the country every day. the share of respondents who believe that their living standards will improve over the next year has fallen since the end of june. the number of respondents who fear that it will deteriorate   although in minority   has grown.four of the top five issues that respondents identified as facing the country were economic  terror attacks have largely receded from the public imagination following the pulwama attack and the balakot airstrikes   and a growing sixth was the upa bugbear   rising prices.yet  it would appear that the faltering economy has not dented modi s popularity. in the same cvoter tracking poll  modi s popularity is the highest it has been since the beginning of this year. if there was a  balakot bump   there seems to be a further post victory rise  and a more recent kashmir effect. unsurprisingly  the nda was respondents  overwhelming choice as the party that could fix the country s biggest problems.also read  demonetisation  gst  now kashmir. modi govt doesn t think beyond the first steplanguage of the economic rightso  should political analysts assume that the economy does not matter to modi supporters  detractors of prime minister narendra modi and his bjp s muscular hindutva agenda often ascribe his      victory to the latent majoritarianism among india s hindus  built on the back of a cross caste consolidation alone.some would go further and admit that his personal charisma carries the party further past its traditional vote base. but the underlying implication is that modi s economic talk   of eliminating corruption  of delivering high growth to the country and raising personal family incomes  of reducing wasteful welfare expenditure   was moot  and at best a fig leaf of economic conservatism for the social conservatives.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis is inaccurate.in their book ideology and identity  political scientists pradeep chhibber and rahul verma found that more voters leaned rightwards on economic issues in      than in the previous years  based on decades of the national election studies  conducted by the lokniti programme at the centre for the study of developing societies . they found that these economic conservatives were overwhelmingly bjp supporters. the bjp  they argued  nurtured resentment among a growing middle class about  harmful  subsidies and large scale welfare spending  including on minorities  while promising high economic growth   the classic language of the economic right.also read  the three mistakes of modi critics in india   and  soft moditva  is not one of themwhy the steadfast support for modiso  economic conservatives may have been a key constituency for an untested bjp  but what explains their steadfastness after five years of the bjp being in power  the party that campaigned against large scale  wasteful  welfare programmes in      only expanded on these. after all  the nda s agricultural loan waiver announced in the run up to the      elections   which stands at rs        crore as per the latest budget estimates   is the largest welfare programme that india has ever had. job creation and economic growth have been far below the targets.there is certainly anecdotal and empirical evidence to suggest that the welfare schemes that the nda took up cast a wide net. jyoti mishra and vibha attri  researchers at lokniti csds  found that the reach of the flagship schemes launched by narendra modi led nda i was comparable to those launched by upa i  and substantially more than those pushed by upa ii.the nda government was more likely to be credited for these schemes than in the past  where state governments were more likely to be misattributed with credit  chhibber and verma find in their to be published research. if voters did receive tangible benefits  they might be less likely to punish macroeconomic failure. if  wasteful  spending was the criticism  a greater reach of welfare schemes is likely to have gone down well with even economic conservatives.several commentators have also noted that despite other macroeconomic failures  the modi government has consistently kept a lid on food price inflation  believed to be the straw that broke the upa ii s back.all of these  however  have expiry dates. or rather   they should. but that is where an analysis of data as it currently exists breaks down.imperfect nature of pollingthere is definite evidence that even something that appears to be  objective   like the respondent s family income or job status  can be experienced quite subjectively. according to surveys conducted by lokniti csds between may      and march       the bjp s popularity went up and correspondingly the share of respondents who said their income was not sufficient or that they could not find a job went down  despite little evidence of substantial improvement in the economy during this period.finally  one part of the problem and potentially part of the answer lies in the imperfect nature of polling in india. most election studies do not help us separate voters  beliefs. for instance  we do not know how many voters would still choose an economically right leaning party if it wasn t also socially right leaning   in other words  we do not know how many true economic conservatives there are.chhibber and verma constructed their definition using certain nes answers as proxies  but this is an imperfect science. moreover  the specific wording of questions changes between nes rounds  and the      round has few usable questions on economic views.it s hard to say  then  where the economic right vote will go  when it isn t even clear if there is a pure economic right. even if there is one  modi is in no trouble yet.also read  modi   amit shah s bjp is one economic crisis away from recreating indira gandhi s      fallthe author is a chennai based data journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




demonetisation  gst  now kashmir. modi govt doesn t think beyond the first step
text size  a  a if demonetisation and gst implementation are anything to go by  when the narendra modi government takes a big transformative decision  it only looks at first order effects  ignoring the far more important second and third order effects that start playing havoc later on. twenty three days after article     was abrogated  it is time to ask if the modi government has lined up the next steps in kashmir  and if so  then what are they. in many ways  we seem to be experiencing the same disregard for second and third order effects now in kashmir  with the initial  good  effects of article     abrogation dissipating and tougher dilemmas setting in.a likely  unbalanced  assemblyconsider first what we can guesstimate based on available evidence. the governance of the union territory of jammu and kashmir will almost certainly be delegated to local councils. the fact that the peoples democratic party  pdp  and the national conference  nc  boycotted these elections  which threw up a whole new rung of leadership  means that the new leaders have indeed been identified.then there are the    seats allotted to pakistan occupied kashmir. in the post delimitation     member assembly of jammu and kashmir  these    seats  which the modi government has maintained will remain vacant  until the area ceases to be so occupied and the people residing in that area elect their representatives   could be given to  nominated members . that is  if the modi government is tempted to  nominate  members for these seats  it could identify pakistani dissidents from those areas.it seems almost certain that when the delimitation happens  the    seats will get split between jammu and kashmir  with a possible bias towards jammu . but this is where the  nominated  members could ensure a marginalisation of the kashmiri political elites. in effect  political careers of omar abdullah and mehbooba mufti are finished  even if they are not  the leaders most certainly will not have any powers. why because the top administrative level in the union territory will be filled by a new jammu elite supported by  nominated  members from pok. with the lower rung of municipal corporators  which is where all the money making happens  now closed off   not just to the muftis and the abdullahs but also to the hurriyat leaders   there will be a significant shift in the region s politics. the former mainstream political elites will no longer be able to sponge off central funds from the top nor raise funds from the bottom.seems a bit like chanakyan genius  doesn t it  except it isn t.also read  the sheer folly of modi govt s media managers plotting a kashmir is normal storywe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowdealing a hard hand without thoughtthis is where the second important wheel in the clog comes in  the role of indian security forces and the intelligence apparatus that have been incentivised and corrupted by a conflict economy and which never understood the meaning of good governance to begin with.consider what has happened so far. in order to keep some        thousand miscreants at bay  the modi government has shut the communication network in the whole valley. as discussed before  this is obviously counterproductive not just in terms of security but also in terms of population management. people may tolerate the restrictions for a while  but at some time  the ban will push them over the edge. moreover  our forces and the police have never actually understood carrots and sticks  evidenced by the arrest of a doctor  urologist omar salim  monday. by all means  target the stone pelters  but why arrest a man making a public request  what message does this send worryingly  an anonymous  but clearly well informed  piece that came out a few days ago seemed to throw light on the extent to which the security apparatus of regime ancien in kashmir has been compromised  in fact  it is being empowered by the new dispensation. for their part  this same old guard was  cannibalising members of the old corrupt gravy train into the new corrupt gravy train . the article also proceeded to give the examples of shah faesal and shehla rashid in addition to several others.government supporters would say this is not the case. their main argument is that unlike the previous counter insurgency attempts that would be followed by the election of same politicians  the entire ecosystem has been targeted this time  newspapers that used to coordinate stone pelting and tacks according to some  banks that were used for money laundering  mainstream political parties that indulged in corruption in dispensing central governments funds  and the hurriyat which received money from pakistan.they would also contend that unlike       when the opposition felt it had no options and thus turned to terrorism  the muslim united front s syed salahuddin who went on to head the hizbul mujahideen while the muf largely became the present day hurriyat   the muftis  the abdullahs  the geelanis and the mirwaizs have been part of the gravy train for so long that despite having no options  they will prefer a cushy life to one of exile and hard work at the behest of a capricious and murderous foreign government. moreover  this felling of the old leaders has allowed a new crop of leaders to grow.also read  modi govt s kashmir crackdown is damaging india s image abroada lacking security apparatusto a large extent this is true  but just like the central government  this narrative too falls into the same trap  where the intelligence bureau and the jammu and kashmir police are assumed as straight players that haven t been incentivised and corrupted by a conflict economy. even assuming they haven t been corrupted and accepting that intelligence gathering is by nature a highly amoral  dirty game full of shades of grey  the bureau and the police still need to be reined in  of which there are absolutely no signs. it is pertinent to ask then  under what principle of counter insurgency or good governance were shah faesal and shehla rashid detained  under what circumstances were they released  and how was it different from the case of omar abdullah and mehbooba mufti  and how is the re arrest of shah faesal justified while shehla remains loose  at some point  the modi government needs to introspect.be it the counterproductive communications blackout  the arrest of doctor omar salim  the unanswered questions of the arbitrary arrest and release and re arrest of political leaders  and a lackadaisical approach in dealing with the intelligence bureau and the jammu and kashmir police   one is forced to conclude that the modi government simply hasn t thought things through as thoroughly as it should have. only time will tell if things get better in kashmir  but if they do  while half of the credit must go to the government  the remaining half should be reserved for sheer dumb luck.the author is a senior fellow at the institute of peace and conflict studies. he tweets  iyervval. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




three mistakes of modi critics in india    soft moditva  is not one of them
text size  a  a jairam ramesh s remark that pm narendra modi should not be demonised carries two very different suggestions. the first is newsy  full of masala  but of fleeting significance. the second is bland  but critical to thinking politics in our times.the first way is to read his remark as a gesture of  soft moditva   of anti leadership rumblings within the congress  as shuffling of feet in order to buy one s peace with the regime  if not a preparation for joining the long queue outside the bjp office. this is how many congress members and commentators have read his remarks and those by shashi tharoor and abhishek manu singhvi who spoke in his defence. this is why that throwaway remark at a book launch grabbed headlines and invited criticism within the congress.also read  shashi tharoor  congress members must constructively criticise modi  not go after my tweetknowing whatever little i do about jairam ramesh  i would be shocked if this were to be even half true. but these are strange times when shocking things happen at uncanny regularity. in any case  it is clear that some of the noise around his statement may well be a plea for going soft on modi. many congress and opposition leaders are looking for a fig leaf to switch sides. jairam ramesh may have  unwittingly  offered that. but all this is of fleeting interest  the routine stuff of everyday politics.i am interested in the second reading of that remark  as an invitation to strategic rethinking. at least on the face of it  this is what jairam ramesh meant. he is reported to have said   if you are going to demonise him all the time  you are not going to be able to confront him . unless we recognise that he is doing things  which people recognise and which have not been done in the past  we are not going to be able to confront this guy . this reading is of critical importance as it puts its finger on perils of anti modism that passes for opposition politics these days.also read  one point bjp  congress agree on  modi s unbeatable. frozen politics waits for big new ideathe three mistakes of modi criticsmodi critics like me make at least three big mistakes. first of all  their obsession with narendra modi makes him a larger than life figure. in their desire to counter modi s attempt to take credit for everything positive  they end up producing a mirror image  modi critics tend to blame modi for everything. a lynching in some corner of the country  the failure of one agricultural policy  badly managed balance sheet in the budget   everything is blamed on narendra modi. i am also guilty of this. my short book  a critique of the bjp government s agricultural policy  was titled  modi raj me kisan . modi critics do as much publicity for him as his fawning supporters.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowsecond  most modi critics suffer from knee jerk anti modism. since a policy or an action is associated with him or his government  we must oppose him. the recent draft national education policy is a case in point. it may be a good document or a bad one  depending on one s viewpoint. but it is certainly not a diabolic rss blueprint to saffronise education. i suspect that much of the criticism of this document is because it was produced under the modi government. besides  modi critics tend to have it both ways. if he travels abroad frequently  we attack him. if he were not to do so  we would have attacked him even more furiously. the trouble with this routine  knee jerk opposition is that it loses the public. people see it for what it is  opposition for the sake of opposition.third  and most importantly  modi critics fail to acknowledge modi s popularity and fail to understand the reasons behind it. the inability to foresee the outcome of the      lok sabha elections was a classic illustration of this failure. no doubt  modi s popularity had dipped in the second half of     . but post pulwama and post balakot  his popularity was head and shoulder above all the opposition leaders put together. after that  the election was no contest at all. but most modi critics were disconnected from this reality. even after the election results  many modi critics continue to live in denial. they find it hard to acknowledge that the bjp won  not because of any evm manipulation but because people wanted to give modi another chance.such a failure to acknowledge modi s popularity leaves little room to understand reasons for it. it is nearly impossible for modi critics to see that ordinary voters may have had good reasons to vote for modi. just as american liberals find it impossible to believe that anyone within their senses could vote for donald trump  modi critics find it impossible to make sense of an ordinary indian voter. modi critics find themselves in a smaller and yet smaller circle of opinion  culturally cut off from the rest of society. the end result is disbelief  anxiety and angst  but no meaningful action. this is a recipe for political paralysis.also read  how india s liberals and opposition can start winning the battle of ideaslessons from turkeywhat  then  should modi critics do  for starters  we should turn our attention to turkey. when ates ilyas bassoy  the national campaign manager for republican people s party  chp   was asked about his strategy that led to the defeat of president recep tayyip erdo an s party in the istanbul elections this year  he said   we had two simple rules  ignore erdogan and love those who love erdogan.  spelling out the implications of this brilliant political strategy for india would require another article. and long political debates.it is vital that we start those debates now. for it is not just about an individual called narendra modi and a bunch of his critics. this is about the very future of our republic. the opposition has lost not just an election  but its sense of direction altogether. the major non bjp parties seem to have no tactics  no strategy  indeed no doctrine to take on the bjp s hegemony. learning to deal with narendra modi is the first step towards developing a politics that could counter this hegemony.the author is the national president of swaraj india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




shashi tharoor  congress members must constructively criticise modi  not go after my tweet
text size  a  a it began  as so many controversies seem to these days  with a tweet.when my congress colleague jairam ramesh  whose credentials as a loyalist and an advocate of progressive policies are beyond doubt  was quoted in the media as saying that we should not  demonise  prime minister narendra modi  the indian media  with its relentless ability to make mountains out of molehills  erupted. my friend abhishek manu singhvi  who has defended innumerable congress leaders in court  agreed with him. when asked my views  i tweeted  as you know  i have argued for six years now that  narendramodi should be praised whenever he says or does the right thing  which would add credibility to our criticisms whenever he errs. i welcome others in oppn coming around to a view for which i was excoriated at the time  at that point  the dung really hit the fan  especially in kerala  where congress leaders reacted as if they had caught me in the boarding school tuck shop with my hand in the cookie jar. angry denunciations were issued by all and sundry  one dashed off an outraged letter to the interim party president sonia gandhi  another invited me to leave the party and join the bjp  the irony that it was barely eight years since he himself had rejoined the congress after leaving it and attacking it for years  was not lost on many .also read  lack of clarity in party leadership is hurting congress  says shashi tharoorwhat was really saidnow let s take a deep breath and see what those who are deemed to have committed such sacrilege  really said.jairam ramesh had reportedly affirmed that it is  time we recognise pm modi s work and what he did between      and      due to which he was voted back to power by over    per cent of the electorate.  he had added that modi spoke a language that connected him with the people.  unless we realise that he is doing things which people recognise and which have not been done in the past  we are not going to be able to confront this guy .also  if you are going to demonise him all the time  you are not going to be able to confront him   he warned. one report stressed that he mentioned he was not asking anyone to applaud the prime minister  but just wanted the political class to  recognise the traits he has brought to governance .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nownot only do i not disagree with any of this  it is pretty much what i said in       for which i was publicly criticised by my own party leadership  reviled in the kerala party newspaper  and removed as a party spokesman. that s why  when asked on twitter  i responded as i did.my tweet has been twisted and reported  and denounced  as  praise for modi . where  i have asked innocently  is the praise  no answer. my critics seem to feel that since modi has done nothing worth applauding  i should not have said that our attacks on him should be tempered by the occasional acknowledgement of his right actions   everything he does  in their view  should be seen by a true congressman as vile.also read  demonising modi  not recognising his work won t help  jairam ramesh warns oppna realist way to get congress backnow  i am the first to say there is not much in the positive ledger  as i have pointed out at length in my     page takedown of the modi government  the paradoxical prime minister. but he has been effective in taking his vote percentage across india from    per cent in      to    per cent in       and as a party which stayed at around    per cent in both elections  we in the congress need to make an effort to understand why. clearly enough voters thought modi was delivering something for them   we need to acknowledge that  but point out its limitations  yes  he built toilets  but    per cent of them don t have running water  yes  he gave poor rural women gas cylinders  but    per cent of them can t afford refills. but if we act as if modi has done nothing  however flawed  and people still voted for him  then we are saying that people are stupid  which is not a position that wins you votes.i want congress  together with progressive  secular and liberal parties  to come back to power. for that  it is not enough to keep attracting the core congress supporters. we need to win back the trust   and the votes   of those who deserted us for the bjp in the last two lok sabha elections. that requires addressing what has attracted them to modi. then  our criticism has more credibility. that s all i have been saying.also read  congress today doesn t need a leader or an election win  it needs an ideologybeing a constructive oppositionseveral loyal congress members have taken me to task for the phrase  don t demonise modi   when no one has been urging the pm not to continue demonising congress leaders.  don t demonise modi  is not my phrase   they need to ask the person who used it what he meant. but it s clear that the bjp  for its part  clearly thinks i have demonised modi  because they have filed two cases against me for my critical remarks  in one case seeking an arrest warrant  which my congress critics should hail as a badge of honour  instead of demonising me i am proud of my record for several years  in and out of parliament  in standing up and speaking out in defence of the progressive  secular and inclusive principles and values of the congress party  and in identifying  analysing and skewering the ruling party s assaults on the idea of india and the nature of our constitution. i am more than slightly mystified to be seen by some in my own party as some sort of bjp inclined modi sympathiser. does no one read these days  beyond screaming  breaking news  headlines scrolling past a busy screen i had lamented my excoriation by the congress in       and hoped jairam s statement in      was an admission by some of the congress establishment that i had been right all along. there is a growing recognition of this sentiment in the party today and i urge my well intentioned but misguided critics to look at the national picture and realise how we have to revamp our strategy to become a winning party again.be fierce in our criticisms of the modi government  as i have been  but make sure our criticisms are taken seriously by the public because they are occasionally balanced against acknowledgements of genuine examples of right actions. show the public that we stand up for national interests first  and demonstrate that those interests would be safer in our hands than his   by agreeing when he takes the same stands as we would  and disagreeing strongly when he doesn t  as well as pointing out the failures in his execution of chosen policies. that s what a constructive opposition does   and what the congress should.the author is a member of parliament for thiruvananthapuram and former mos for external affairs and hrd. he served the un as an administrator and peacekeeper for three decades. he studied history at st. stephen s college  delhi university and international relations at tufts university. tharoor has authored    books  both fiction and non fiction  his most recent book is the paradoxical prime minister. follow him on twitter  shashitharoor. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




how narendra modi cracked the donald trump code and turned the tide on kashmir
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi and us president donald trump have begun a beautiful new relationship on the margins of the g  summit in biarritz  france  with modi showing him the carrot of ramping up energy trade as an example of how things can only get better with the us.india imports    billion worth of energy already and intends to do more  the pm told the us president  when he meets a variety of energy majors in houston during his us visit next month.the bait came before the two leaders met at the delegation level talks the morning after the dinner at the h tel du palais  which french president macron threw for his guests. trump began his remarks by calling modi  an incredible man  and then in exactly three seconds  went on to add   we re talking about trade and we re talking about military. we re talking about many different things  and we ve had some great discussions. we were together last night for dinner  and i learned a lot about india. fascinating place. beautiful place. and it s an honor to be with you. a real honor   trump said.this is the man who wanted to mediate on kashmir  with pakistan prime minister imran khan standing next to him in the white house  barely a month ago.so  what happened also read  modi must make sure trump s us doesn t hyphenate india   pakistan againa shift in foreign policyyou don t need a rocket scientist to tell you what happened   in any case  they are busy with the chandrayaan s moon landing. modi cracked the transactional code that is at the heart of donald trump  which is that money  money  money  makes the world go round.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowit s a wonder the pm and the ministry of external affairs didn t see it before. remember how the us agonised over a handful of harley davidsons that trump wanted india to import at little or no tariffs  upon which indian bureaucrats cut customs duty by    per cent  but of course that hardly pleased the us president now  the gujarati in modi understands the value of cash   carry like few pms before. perhaps  the new pragmatic external affairs minister  s. jaishankar  pointed out to the pm that india should take a leaf out of china s book   discover the weaknesses of your enemy and embrace them.in trump s case  it s trade. he strongly feels that  we re the bank that everybody wants to rob  and that america s unnecessary generosity has earned it a      billion trade deficit with various countries.so when modi s bureaucrats did some tinkering with the harley davidson duties which  for trump  became emblematic of the relationship  and modi followed up by thumbing his nose in trump s face by buying   .  billion worth of russian s     systems  the us president came down heavily on india and ordered the withdrawal of special trade benefits immediately after modi was sworn in for the second time.the biarritz meeting is important because it indicates a tactical shift in indian foreign policy. trump is too powerful to be antagonised  so he must be managed. remember that xi jinping is breathing down your neck next door. also  he s coming to india in october. a perception reversal of the increasingly troubled india us relationship was in order.also read  a year ago  pm imran khan promised naya pakistan but gave a series of embarrassmentsthe worst paper tigermodi has the best luck of course  in the form of imran khan. over the last    hours  khan has implicitly threatened to use nuclear weapons  a nightmare the world dealt with on a daily basis in      during kargil  and later in           during operation parakram.it was so bad during parakram  in fact  that the us  the uk and japanese diplomats evacuated their families from delhi and sent them home   all to tell india to behave and act responsibly now that it was a nuclear power.but khan is turning out to be the worst kind of paper tiger   one with no striped nuance   under the complete control of army chief  general qamar javed bajwa  who s tenure just got extended.the pakistan bomb was supposed to be an  islamic bomb  that a.q. khan and other pakistani scientists stole from the western labs in defence of the ummah. but just look at what the uae has done  it has awarded modi the order of zayed  its highest civilian honour   a long necklace  diamonds and all   and the truth is that where the uae goes  saudi arabia goes too. mohammad bin salman  the    year old crown prince  considers the uae ruler his guru   even as he throws a few million dirhams at the former pakistan army chief raheel sharif  currently heading the saudi arabia led islamic military counter terrorism coalition.imran khan monday told his fellow countrymen and women that every friday  from      .   pm  they must stop whatever they re doing and come out to  express solidarity  with the  people of kashmir .the pakistanis  all those who voted for him because they wanted to or were forced persuaded to do so  are thunderstruck. they are probably wondering how much worse it can get.this week s foreign policy masterstroke must belong to the pm. he has  at least for the moment  turned the international tide on kashmir  with a mix of temptation  persuasion and plain speak.as for what s happening inside kashmir  well  that s another story.also read  is pm modi allowing trump to play policeman in india pakistan tensions over kashmir subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




ladakh fought for india but lived in j k s shadow. modi govt has now given people their due
text size  a  a the jubilation and euphoria in ladakh over its separation from the erstwhile state of jammu and kashmir is a clear signal that what the narendra modi government has done is right. by abrogating article     of the constitution and making ladakh a separate union territory  the government has finally given its people their due. no wonder the decision has received such widespread support in ladakh  which has largely been ignored by the jammu and kashmir governments of the past.a quick look at historical anecdotes from india s wars reveals the contribution of ladakh and its citizens in maintaining new delhi and the indian army s control in the region.ladakh during wartimebrave citizens of ladakh led by    year old chewang rinchen put up stiff resistance against the  tribal raid  in     .  rinchen later became a colonel in the army.  their resistance allowed the indian army to reach in time and push back the pakistani soldiers masquerading as tribal raiders. the locals led by engineer sonam norbu also established a makeshift airfield at leh without any major earthmoving equipment  which became a vital airbase and ensured that the raiders were completely pushed back from the track connecting srinagar to leh. even more significantly  in       ladakh scouts  led by then major chewang rinchen  liberated over     square kilometres of territory in baltistan from pakistan.the people of ladakh have stood shoulder to shoulder with the indian troops during the sino indian war of       the india pakistan war of       and the kargil conflict of     . they also contributed immensely in helping the indian army maintain its control over the world s highest battleground  the siachen glacier  when pakistan cunningly tried to occupy the strategic heights. ladakh is the only territory in india  which shares borders with both pakistan and china and almost its entire border is contested.in spite of showing exemplary heroism in times of crisis  citizens of ladakh never got their due from the government in srinagar. it comprised almost    per cent of the territory of the former state  but the region has been still largely ignored because of its sparse population and remote location. moreover  the disquiet in the valley ensured that even the central government was largely preoccupied with its focus on kashmir to the detriment of ladakh. this resulted in scarce development  despite enormous resources and potential in the region. its unique ethno linguistic identity was allowed to wither away  until popular movement forced the government to establish autonomous hill councils.also read  in new j k  waqf properties to become schools   colleges  ladakh to get  hunar hub loss of trade and commercehistorically  ladakh has been one of the five himalayan kingdoms and was an important trade junction connecting tibet with different parts of south asia and central asia. consequently  a majority of the population depended directly or indirectly on trade. there were regular trade convoys between leh and lhasa. high altitude and low precipitation restricted agriculture to river valleys  however  pastoralism was widely practised in the countryside. ladakh was also on one of the important pilgrimage routes to kailash mansarovar  which crossed into tibet from demchok. in fact  the kingdom of ladakh owned a village minsar well inside tibet  whose tax revenue was used to maintain the kailash mansarovar yatra. once ladakh became part of maharaja gulab singh s territory  the principality of minsar also came under his sovereignty.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowafter the independence and the tribal raid  china banned trade convoys from nubra valley into xinjiang in     . this seriously impacted the livelihood in ladakh. chinese occupation of tibet further worsened the situation. consequently  ladakhi residents  who primarily depended on trade through the region  were reduced to penury. the region  which had been one of the highest commercial junctions of the world  was left to languish in complete isolation. although the first flight had landed in leh as early as    may       civilian flights were permitted only in     .the construction of a road from srinagar to leh began only when the chinese threat became imminent in     . even though the construction was completed by       civilian traffic remained restricted for the next decade. consequently  the people of ladakh  who have always been enterprising  were confined to an isolated and inaccessible corner of india. government jobs  primarily in the army and security forces  remained the only avenues for livelihood besides limited agriculture and pastoralism.also read  tracing history of ladakh s dynamic borders   from tibetan empire to sikh rule to j k statesrinagar s influence on educationalthough the moravian christian mission had opened a school in leh in       very few locals joined it. the government schools affiliated to jammu and kashmir board taught students from the perspective of kashmir and in a language alien to the ladakhis. their first english medium school was started in       and the only college in     . the region had inadequate health and education facilities until the establishment of ladakh autonomous hill council in     . avenues of livelihood that began emerging after the region was opened up for tourism in      really took off only when the council was established. however  various provisions of the jammu and kashmir s now defunct constitution prevented investment in this sector  which holds enormous potential. these provisions also ensured that the market space was captured by valley based shopkeepers.ut status creates new avenueswith ladakh now a union territory  new offices will need to be created  possibly in a new capital  which should trigger huge investment in construction. the region desperately needs new urban centres as both leh and kargil are overcrowded. new government jobs will be created and central grants and investments will come to the region  without any dangers of it being diverted to srinagar. the tourism sector will see investment  especially in the field of high end tourism. with ladakh connected to the national grid  winter tourism now has enormous potential. the annual footfall will increase manifold because many places have remained inaccessible until now. the region has enormous potential for solar power and wind energy  which require large investments. in days to come  corporate sector could invest in a big way in these two sectors. similarly  there is scope for pharmaceutical  food processing and hydropower industry. cool and dust free environment of ladakh could also support electronic and information technology industry. however  they may require special incentives and establishment of special economic zones.also read  modi govt s move to make ladakh a ut reopens an old front with chinathe union territory status will also help preserve the unique ethno linguistic and religious identity of the region. a large section of ladakh s population follows different schools of vajrayana buddhism  widely practised in the himalayan regions. their cultural identity was facing erosion under educational institutions governed from srinagar. similarly  among the muslim population  most people adhere to twelver shia islam or nurbakhshi sect  which is prevalent only in baltistan. nurbakhshis often complain that other major sects are invariably poaching their followers. so stark is their sense of insecurity that some villages in turtuk region have not allowed mobile phones or cable tv in their villages. with the region coming under the direct control of the central government  such diverse religious and cultural identities will be better preserved. radical ideologies from the valley  which were trying to radicalise the region s youth  will now lose steam.the modi government s move will allow the resource rich region of ladakh to realise its huge potential. it will also ensure that the kashmir issue and cross border terrorism do not cast their shadow on this peaceful region. if the circumstances permit and the geopolitical environment improves  a road link could be established from karakoram pass to kandla through leh  to revive the historical trade routes.alok bansal is director  india foundation  and a member of jammu kashmir study centre. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




pm modi wants a bright future for kashmiri youth by keeping them in darkness
text size  a  a suppose you grew up with very strict parents. they didn t allow you to go for sleepovers. even getting permission for a birthday party was one huge task. you weren t given access to mobile phones. you were not allowed to watch television for more than a limited time. even the programmes that you could watch were fixed. you couldn t even choose your friends.sounds like a tough life  right but hey  it was all for your good. all of this  only because you were too young and too naive to differentiate between right and wrong. except  now you are a grown up who works round the clock  but the rules of your house remain the same. any attempt to protest against this strict regime would mean that you don t love your parents and want to get rid of them.well  that is kashmir in a nutshell. the people of kashmir have spent a lifetime trying to search for their true identity in between violence and violation of their rights. and throw in some internet shutdowns  banned television channels  no network zones  curfews  closed schools and colleges. a war hysteria.one fine day  when the narendra modi government suddenly decided to scrap article      a war of opinions took over the country. even people with minimal knowledge of the kashmir issue applauded the move. they said it would bring development to the state. tourism will flourish and the youth will be exposed to better opportunities. within hours  we heard politicians say that the state  now two union territories  will have iits  nits and iims. if this happens  the students of kashmir will get quality education. the businesses that will spread in the valley will bring opportunities for the youth.also read  kashmiris must know their battle isn t against india but against rss bjp ideologyall these plans and decisions about the  bright  future of the youth while keeping them in darkness  under house arrest. the removal of the special status might bring in opportunities  but on what terms  how bright is the future  if the roads of progress are built on a failed and broken system  a system that venerates the execution of human rights and seals the deal with a sign of victory. a victory that is highly polarised  manipulated and self mandated.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe civics textbooks for students of class   have a section called  fundamental rights . when the youth are denied the rights that they had once learned by heart  is it politically correct to celebrate a noble future  any negative reporting is immediately labelled fake. any voice of protest is put behind bars. this propaganda has been so successfully embedded in the system that people are unable to find anything wrong with execution.if you look at the current scenario of locked institutions  sealed mouths and a controlled media  the future of freedom for the youth looks murky  and undesirable.growing up  one of the most surprising things for me was finding out that the map of jammu and kashmir showed in schools was in reality completely different. yet somehow  the beautiful land remains everyone s favourite political battleground.also read  this is why pm modi doesn t really care about internationalisation of kashmir issuehritika singh is the winner of the opinion writing contest on the first edition of democracy wall  season  . this was in response to the question asked by theprint  will scrapping jammu   kashmir s special status ensure a better future for its youth democracy wall is a monthly free speech campus initiative organised by theprint in collaboration with facebook.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




france to chidambaram   pm modi now has almost complete control over all levers of power
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi s ongoing visits to france and uae are thank you calls to president emmanuel macron and president sheikh khalifa bin zayed al nahyan for standing by india and not allowing the kashmir story to become internationalised   at least so far.so  modi flew all the way to paris over wednesday thursday for a mere    hours to hear macron tell the world that kashmir was a bilateral matter between india and pakistan   even as pakistan prime minister imran khan s told the new york times that he isn t interested in any more conversations with india  that means he fell right into modi s trap.flying outmodi is currently in abu dhabi for his third visit  where he will receive the order of zayed award. uae was not only the first arab country to declare the abrogation of article     an internal matter of india  but the sheikh s close friendship with mohammed bin salman of saudi arabia is likely to help tell the rest of the arab world to zip their mouths on the kashmir question   at least for the time being.modi is leading the charge on kashmir   he flies back to france on    august to meet his g   partners  including donald trump  boris johnson and perhaps  angela merkel   while external affairs minister s. jaishankar used his travels in the neighbourhood to tell bangladesh and nepal that they should stay away from kashmir.  they agreed. also read  this is why pm modi doesn t really care about internationalisation of kashmir issuehandling things back homemodi s other message to the international community is equally important  don t set too much store with the congress led opposition in india  they are going to jail  one at a time. even the smartest and brightest of them all  the former finance home minister p. chidambaram  has feet of clay.so  as the congress party flails at home  the modi amit shah duo is consolidating power at home and abroad. the cbi is expanding the ambit of its charges against chidambaram to include the alleged corruption around the aircel maxis investment  while the bjp s clear message to the opposition is that  since you can t fight us  join us.  as many as     opposition members across the political spectrum have done exactly that since modi took over in his second term.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbut modi also realises that he is walking a fine line on kashmir and it is up to him to prevent it from becoming a big screaming story in newspapers abroad. so  no foreign journalists are being allowed to go to kashmir anymore  it was always difficult for the foreign press to get permission anyway  but this has now completely stopped.more importantly  modi knows it will be difficult to flaunt the  world s largest democracy  tag  that democracies will be weighed by different standards than dictatorships if the situation in kashmir isn t eased sooner than later. which is what j k chief secretary b.v.r. subrahmanyam and his team are now focusing on doing.that s because couched in all the statements of support by the big powers is this line  kashmir is a bilateral issue to be resolved between india and pakistan  in accordance with the wishes of the people.also read  imran khan was right. modi did resolve the kashmir issue once and for all  reham khanmodi also knows that opinion is divided over the presidential order abrogating article     and dissolving jammu and kashmir to transform it into a union territory   even if amit shah successfully argued that parliament was fully equipped to speak for the people of j k during president s rule   and that several petitions are in the offing in the supreme court.then there is the matter of politicians being under house arrest. when will they be released  do they speak for the people of j k even when the assembly is in suspended animation  do they represent the  wishes of the people  of j k  and if they do  how can they do that if they are under house arrest modi must keep in mind that macron also said that france will be attentive to human rights in kashmir.that s why the two pronged modi strategy to disarm the international community with a variety of carrots  buy    rafale jets from the french and perhaps a few more  and sticks  in conjunction with attempting to ease the curfew in j k is so important.that s also why the phrase   in accordance with the wishes of the people   remains key and even macron has no option but to use it with modi    the people s rights should be protected   he said  as he balanced his comments  adding that no third party should incite violence in the region.also read  what separates modi s nda from manmohan singh s upa   chidambaram s arrestcomplete control of leversmeanwhile  the us and the uk are on the same page  notwithstanding donald trump s many statements in as many days  and so are the other non permanent members of the un security council these days  like germany.modi will surely win the west s heart on the kashmir issue   but he hasn t won it yet. that s probably why he took a break in the uae for a day or two  it s always nice to be celebrated by rulers happy to give up dawood ibrahim aide farooq takla as well as economic offenders like deepak talwar and christian michel  the latter in exchange for the dubai princess who fled to india last year.meanwhile  as he flies back to biarritz  france  to participate in the g   meetings as an observer  the cbi and enforcement directorate will rub chidambaram s nose in the ground.this week is proof  if proof was needed  that modi s control over the levers of power is almost complete.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




what separates modi s nda from manmohan singh s upa   chidambaram s arrest
text size  a  a the arrest of congress leader p. chidambaram wednesday night shows the resolve of the narendra modi government to take its fight against corruption to the highest levels. the cbi seems to have put together a foolproof case against the former home and finance minister.chidambaram s arrest also highlights some glaring differences between the upa regime under the all powerful sonia gandhi  who wielded extra constitutional authority  and the nda government headed by an extremely popular leader  who has successfully established himself beyond doubt as a crusader against corruption  running a  government with a difference .charges of corruption were levelled against ministers and officials during the upa tenure  but then prime minister lacked the authority and resolve to take punitive or corrective actions  which prompted many to call him  maun mohan singh .the current dispensation headed by narendra modi has made its point loud and clear   there will be zero tolerance on corruption and misuse of public money.also read  chidambaram arrest shows a new normal. under modi shah  nobody is above the lawthe question of public perceptionthe other big difference between the two governments is the public perception about them. during the upa regime  the general perception was that corruption at top echelons was normal. this was a far cry from what the first prime minister of india  jawaharlal nehru  had supposedly said   those corrupt will be hanged from the nearest lamp post. under successive congress regimes  no one was  hanged   not because there were no lamp posts  but because the political will was missing.by initiating action against chidambaram  modi has sent a strong signal to not only outsiders  but also his own team  corruption at any level will not be tolerated. people of india now believe that the corrupt will not go scot free under the narendra modi government.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowgiving law agencies a free handyet another point that shows the difference between the two governments is the manner in which the law enforcing authorities have been given time and a free hand to prepare a water tight case against chidambaram. the former union minister knows the law and how law enforcement agencies function.  interim protection from arrest  allowed him to drag the case endlessly.yet the agencies were on his trail  collecting evidence and keeping up the pressure on courts through their hard work. finally  with the delhi high court rejecting chidambaram s anticipatory bail plea  his arrest became imminent.also read  chidambaram arrest  political drama or govt can t risk it after mallya  nirav modi flight dismissal a setbackthe law will take its own course  and it is now for the cbi to fight the case with all the expertise available at its command.in the past  many such cases of corruption have been dismissed for want of strong evidence or on technical grounds. in the  g spectrum case  for instance  the court last year acquitted former telecom minister a. raja  dmk mp kanimozhi and others and said the prosecution  miserably failed  to prove the charges.any such dismissal is a huge setback for the narendra modi government and its anti corruption image. the opposition is already accusing the government of  political vendetta .but crying  vendetta politics  will not take the congress anywhere. the upa government s alleged acts of commission and omission  especially under chidambaram as the finance minister  will come back to haunt them. as the case against him unfolds  more skeletons will tumble out of the congress  cupboard  revealing the loopholes in governance that encouraged corrupt practices.the modi government will earn more praise if it is able to fix these loopholes permanently.the author is former editor of  organiser . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




chidambaram arrest shows a new normal. under modi shah  nobody is above the law
text size  a  a like many fellow indians  i spent much of the last evening riveted to the small screen as the drama of p. chidambaram s arrest by the cbi unfolded. indeed  as his son karti lamented   the drama and spectacle being enacted by the agencies is to simply sensationalise and satisfy the voyeuristic pleasure of some.  it would be hard to deny the considerable voyeuristic pleasure  if not compelling attraction  of the dramatic proceedings  broadcast live on the telly.as we know   pc   as p. chidambaram is popularly known  had disappeared for the last    hours  giving the enforcement agencies a harrowing time and keeping the media and interested onlookers on tenterhooks. when he did surface  pc did so at the aicc headquarters  at a hastily convened press conference. of course  as it turned out  it was no press conference. pc read out a prepared statement and brooked no questions after he finished. he was flanked by the two legal luminaries cum leaders of the congress party  kapil sibal on his left and abhishek manu singhvi on his right.pc  however  looked perfectly relaxed  his unctuous countenance barely bore a crease. sang froid under stress  his statement was not only well crafted  but the model of persuasion  moderation  and legal acumen. the former home minister and finance minister of india stated that he was not absconding from the law  but seeking its protection. he claimed to have spent all of the previous night working out his legal defence in consultation with his lawyers.moreover  he emphasised that two of the most important and cherished values of the indian constitution  as enshrined in article     were life and liberty. he boldly stated that he preferred the latter to the former  in a manner almost reminiscent of patrick henry s famous statement in        give me liberty or give me death .soon after  pc got into a car and departed for an unknown destination. the reporters tailing him were full of speculations. would he  once again  give the authorities the slip  no  no such thing happened. pc was seen entering the premises of his own home  in upmarket jor bagh  new delhi  accompanied by singhvi and sibal. all three entered through the front door and disappeared inside the house.for a good       minutes his would be captors  the cbi and ed  were nowhere to be seen. as the gates to his mansion closed  the reporters were agog once again with questions. would he sneak out from the back door  once again flummoxing the authorities  of course that would have contradicted his own statement a few minutes earlier in front of national television that he was not a fugitive from justice. or  moreover  that the charges levelled against him were  lies   the work of  pathological liars .at long last  the quite flustered cbi officials showed up at his gate. finding it bolted from inside  several jumped over the boundary wall. with the gate being opened from inside  the posse chasing him rushed in. more reconnoitred the back entrance in the not too clean and soggy service lane. several excruciatingly long minutes passed with all the media reporters and experts filling up the airwaves with inconsequential chatter. then close to   .   at night  the nation learnt that pc was finally in custody.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe prize catch was now in the net.also read  chidambaram arrest  political drama or govt can t risk it after mallya  nirav modi flight as i write this column  the drama over his arrest and interrogation is still unfolding on live tv. pc has just been produced in court. the cbi is asking for a   day remand.legal experts are opining that this is normal in cases of such gravity. but as we await the outcome of the hearing  it is time to step back and reflect on the happenings of the last    hours.is chidambaram s arrest a turning point in indian politics  most certainly  yes. it is not just the optics or sonics  but the deeper ramifications of these events that should concern us. if the whispers in lutyens  delhi were to be believed  pc was  untouchable . not only had the courts already granted him protection from arrest for some    months  but being a part of the  deep state  he was thought to enjoy special legal and judicial immunity.years of cultivating key members of the bureaucracy  judiciary  captains of business and industry  besides having access to almost unlimited financial and political clout  pc was the quintessential representative of the congress culture. he was india s mr teflon to whom no charge or scandal could stick. even as irrepressible and ferret like adversary as the determined subramanian swamy was unable to bring him to book. some had boasted that the aforementioned three lawyer leaders of the congress could alone bring the indian judicial system to a standstill   whether it was the ayodhya or the national herald cases.all this has changed overnight  the new normal is nobody is above the law. the determination of the narendra modi government to close the dragnet on its political opponents  who are also legal offenders  has been demonstrated as never before  that too on live tv.will the gandhis themselves be the next in the firing line only time will tell if pc is convicted. but  in the ultimate analysis  that matters little.a loud and clear message has been sent out that the modi shah duo will not only fight to the finish  but go for the jugular. the silver lining for their opponents is that both sides appear to have faith in the indian legal and judicial system. this the world will certainly watch and appreciate. india  a fully functioning state  is demonstrably capable of upholding the rule of law.this is bound to increase the trust between the ruled and the rulers.also read  on kbc  amitabh bachchan asks about pressure cooker  and media puts chidambaram in itthe author is a professor and director at the indian institute of advanced study  shimla. his views are personal. his twitter handle is  makrandparanspe.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




critics of modi govt s medical education reform act are missing these   points
text size  a  a the national medical commission act       has divided india s medical fraternity  with some vehemently opposing it and others listing its many benefits.its proponents say the act can reform other areas of professional education too  while its detractors believe that certain provisions  subjugate federalism at multiple levels .the national medical commission act  nmc   which replaces the medical council act  demands a better understanding.we address three provisions of the act that have invited maximum criticism. these are also the factors that can have a direct impact on other professional education domains if the nmc model of reforms is applied to them.also read  what is national medical commission bill and why doctors are against itsetting standards through national exit testthe nmc act proposes a common national exit test  next  for all final year mbbs students. only after clearing next will the students get the licence to practise medicine and admission in postgraduate courses. opponents argue that it does away with the checks and balances at multiple levels  clubs different exams together  and may exert undue pressure on the students.the pressure of the exit exam is not undue because as doctors they will be expected to make life and death decisions. students anyway face board and entrance exams and are prepared to deal with such pressure.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowit is commonly believed that private colleges care little about academic standards as long as students have the ability to pay the fees. the  management seats  offered on the basis of capitation fee allow entry to students who have failed to clear the eligibility criteria.by setting high quality standards for exit  next will perform two functions simultaneously  attract the right kind of students to the medical profession  and produce more competent doctors. students who get a seat just because they could afford the capitation fee are less likely to clear the next.over time  there will be fewer instances of such students trying to enter the profession. this will automatically help build a pipeline of more competent doctors.also read  after stents and knee implants  modi govt wants to control prices of all medical devicesshifting focus to learning outcomesnext can help build a uniform benchmark against which the performance of private medical colleges can be assessed. although the criteria for rating and assessing private medical colleges is yet to be decided  linking it to the performance of students in the exit exam could shift the focus from infrastructure requirements to learning outcomes. in order to boost their ranking and enrolment  private institutes would now be motivated to invest in quality education and ensure that a majority of their students perform well in the exit exam.according to the niti aayog  input based regulation in medical education has increased entry barriers  created an inspector raj  and failed to incentivise quality in medical education. the nmc act attempts to correct this. new medical colleges are no longer required to annually renew their permission before recognition  which does away with the need for annual inspection.this will reduce artificial entry barriers  based on parametres other than the quality of education   and bring a renewed focus on learning outcomes. rather than deregulating and giving private colleges a free rein  the new act only changes the nature of regulation to ensure that only the best performers survive.also read  prolonged violence in kashmir has led to  formidable  health crisis  lancet medical journalregulating     seats checks profiteeringthe act permits the government to regulate fees for only up to    per cent of the seats in private colleges  a matter of grave concern for many. this  however  can be seen as a strategic provision in the act to balance different goals. regulation of fees for     per cent seats may discourage private players to open medical colleges or invest in quality education.on the other hand  not regulating fees at all will deprive meritorious students who lack funds. regulating fees for    per cent seats will help cross subsidise education for students from socio economically weaker communities. auditing the accounts of private colleges will reveal the surplus revenue generated from  unregulated  seats. this allows the nmc an indirect control over the rate of return that colleges would be able to earn  thereby checking  profiteering  by private colleges.also read  cheap chinese medical degrees may no longer be an easy option for indian studentsreplacing corruption plagued mcithe national medical commission  which is set to replace the medical council of india  mci   will have    members who will be appointed rather than elected. the nmc will also have five part time members who will be elected from the state medical councils. many argue that having nominated members in the commission undermines the democratic ideals and concentrates power in the hands of the central government.this criticism is surprising for two reasons. first  most regulatory authorities in india and in countries like the united kingdom  the united states  canada and japan are appointed and not elected. second  as evidenced by several committee reports  the mci is mired in various corrupt and unethical practices  primarily because its members are elected by the medical practitioners themselves. since the regulator is elected by the regulated  it ends up prioritising the interests of doctors over those of the common people.the mci s electoral process itself was fraught with problems. the current composition of the nmc  on the other hand  will allow the electoral process put in place for the five part time members to be assessed over time  without compromising the authority s functioning. based on the assessment of the electoral process as well as the performance of these five members  the nmc would be in a position to rethink more objectively about the appointment of members.while the nmc act has the right first principles of incentives  information and accountability  the devil does lie in the details. ultimately  the way we implement these provisions will play a decisive role in resolving contentious issues and in realising the objectives of these reforms. rather than contesting the provisions  this is the time to hold a dialogue on the steps for implementation.parth j. shah is founder  centre for civil society and director  the indian school of public policy  jayana bedi is associate  research at centre for civil society. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in modi era  france has replaced russia as india s new best friend
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi is visiting france for his third state visit and fourth trip. modi and french president emmanuel macron are expected to discuss a gamut of issues ranging from trade and economics to energy security  counter terrorism  defence and security cooperation and collaboration in the indo pacific.france seems to have replaced russia as india s trustworthy friend and partner in the western world.france s stock is currently high in delhi after it supported india s stand on kashmir at the unsc closed door meeting called by china. the french have also previously backed the unsc resolution on global terrorist masood azhar and pushed for stronger fatf sanctions on pakistan.also read  france looks to include india and several other countries as permanent unsc membersfilling in russia s vacuumduring the cold war  the erstwhile soviet union was india s veto providing friend in the un security council. it was the country who understood india s national security interests  especially with respect to pakistan and kashmir. soviet union also provided india with economic assistance and defence equipment.india and france have built a deep economic  security and diplomatic relationship over the last few decades that has spanned the cold war era and strengthened in the last decade or two. france has become the new russia   the new best friend.for a country that values symbolism as much as india does  the importance of france is noticeable in that it is the only country whose presidents have been chief guests at india s republic day parade for a record five times                         and      . both old ally russia soviet union and close neighbour bhutan come second  and only one us president has ever been a republic day guest   barack obama  in     .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowas a post colonial country  india s relationship with former colonial power  the united kingdom  is conflicted. while there is a strong diaspora linkage as well as an economic and security relationship  new delhi is often sceptical about london understanding indian concerns especially when it comes to issues like terrorism  pakistan and kashmir.so  throughout the cold war years  india needed an ally   with veto power  on the security council   and that was soviet union. today  russia has closer relations with china and is not as cognisant of india s interests especially when it comes to pakistan  afghanistan and terrorism. france appears to have moved into the russian vacuum.also read  france unveils new statue commemorating role of indian soldiers in world war ia friend at the un and nsgindia s relationship with france  another former colonial power  has less baggage. france established diplomatic relations with india in       the two countries signed a treaty in      under which in      france ceded full sovereignty over its colonial territories. from      onwards  pondicherry  karaikal  mahe and yanam became part of the union territory of pondicherry  now puducherry . this was in sharp contrast to france s european neighbour portugal  which was reluctant to cede its colonies  goa  daman and diu  resulting in an acrimonious relationship ending in the indian military takeover of goa in     .among the permanent members of the un security council  france has been consistent in supporting india s bid for permanent membership of the unsc. the two also share a similar goal on issues like climate change. india is a signatory to the paris agreement of     .france was also among the few countries that did not condemn india s nuclear tests in      and instead chose to start a strategic dialogue with india that resulted in a strong strategic partnership in the areas of space  security  defence and civil nuclear cooperation. going back to the cold war era  when in response to india s nuclear explosion of      the us suspended delivery of nuclear fuel to the indian atomic power station at tarapur  france stepped in to supply enriched uranium.in september       three weeks after india received a waiver from the nuclear suppliers group  nsg  to conduct civilian nuclear trade and two days after the us india civil nuclear deal was ratified by the us congress  france and india signed an agreement for civil nuclear cooperation. france has also supported india s bid to be a member of the nuclear suppliers group.also read  macron is visiting india at a time when france is reclaiming the mantle of europe s leaderpartners in defencedefence cooperation between the two countries is multi dimensional with institutional exchanges  joint production  joint military exercises and training. the three indian services hold regular annual military exercises with their french counterparts. in july       a     strong indian armed force contingent participated in the bastille day parade  france s national day parade  with then indian prime minister manmohan singh in attendance. this was the first time indian troops had participated in the national day parade of another country.france is one of the leading suppliers of military equipment to india with the dassault mirage      fighter  a squadron of dcns scorp ne class submarines  called kalvari class submarines  and    rafale jets being at the top of the list.at the end of the day  however  india s goal is to build its domestic defence industry and for that  the united states or russia are still india s partners of choice  especially from the point of view of high end technology and foreign investment.bilateral trade between india and france stands at    .  billion  with over       french companies in india amassing a turnover of us     billion and     indian companies in france with an investment stock of    billion. while the two countries are strong economic partners  when india sees france  it views it as a part of europe. the european union is india s largest bilateral trading partner with      billion traded annually in goods and services.also read  pm modi to head to france days ahead of g   summit  nuclear energy on agendathe two countries are also collaborating in the indo pacific where france has overseas territories and an exclusive economic zone. eight thousand french soldiers are stationed in the indo pacific and france has many military facilities  including in r union.in march       india and france signed a logistics agreement whereby the two countries would open their naval bases to each other s warships for refuelling  repair and birthing facilities. the two countries are also collaborating in francophone africa with the aim of identifying developmental activities that the two could work on together.like japan  france is another country india is comfortable working with as there is no baggage or mistrust.the two countries share a similar strategic outlook. both have a strong sense of national pride in their civilisational and cultural heritage. both share a healthy scepticism of american policies  and while both are american partners  both believe in issue based agreement or disagreement. independence in foreign policy decision making   or strategic autonomy as india refers to it   is something that france is comfortable with.india and france have an old relationship and their strategic partnership will be strengthened during pm modi s current visit. however  it is the military and economic rise of china and the fear of an isolationist america that underlines each country s search for friends and allies around the world.the author is a research fellow and director  india initiative at the washington dc based hudson institute. her books include  escaping india  explaining pakistan s foreign policy   routledge        and  from chanakya to modi  the evolution of india s foreign policy   harper collins       . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




chief of defence staff bold step but modi govt s big challenge will be inter service rivalry
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi appointing a chief of defence staff is not an incremental change superimposed on an archaic and inefficient system. the bold  political  move must be utilised to bring radical reforms in higher defence structure and the armed forces. the challenge  however  will be execution and preventing the political apprehensions  bureaucracy military and inter service rivalry from scuttling these reforms.the appointment of a chief of defence staff  cds  will necessitate far reaching changes in the functioning of the national security council  nsc  and the ministry of defence  mod . the command and control of the armed forces and their structures too have to be reformed.logically  the cds should be the highest ranked military officer and the principal military adviser to the prime minister  the cabinet committee on security  ccs   the nsc  the defence minister and the home minister  in relation to disturbed areas and border management . he should also command and control the future tri  bi service theatre commands and the central armed police forces  capf  responsible for loc and lac management.also read  will chief of defence staff s role clash with that of nsa  a lt general answers it for youthe wish listthe chief of defence staff should be a five star general and the senior most armed forces officer. his status must be equal to that of the cabinet secretary.he must be the principal military adviser to the prime minister  the ccs  the nsc  the defence minister and the home minister  on internal security in disturbed areas and border management .he must assist the nsc to formulate and review the national security strategy and execute it.he must exercise direct operational command over the armed forces through tri  bi service theatre commands as well as the capf managing the line of control  loc  and the line of actual control  lac the cds must be responsible for capability development and modernisation of the armed forces. he should draw the plans for budget management and long term force development in consultation with the chiefs of the three services and the defence secretary.the ministry of defence  mod  must be integrated with the headquarters of the armed forces. the integrated mod must be headed by the cds with an armed forces headquarters under the vice chief of defence staff and a department of defence under the defence secretary. the latter must also act as the secretariat of the defence minister. armed forces headquarters should be modelled on the structure of the present integrated defence staff with addition of relevant directorates of the three services. the headquarters of the three services headed by their chiefs  in truncated form  must be a part of the armed forces headquarters to ensure better capability development  administration and training of the three services. there should be seamless cross appointments between the military officers and civilian officials to avoid duplication  particularly with respect to financial management and procurement.with the appointment of the cds  the charter of the national security adviser  nsa  and the functioning of the nsc will require a review. currently the nsa  who heads the defence planning committee and the strategic planning group  is the de facto cds. he has both advisory and executive functions. the roles of the defence minister  the cds  the cabinet secretary and the nsa need to clearly defined.the reform processexecution is all about focusing on the details  without compromising on the intent.the appointment of the cds will have a far reaching impact on the political military bureaucracy relationship. it would be a folly to follow the usual procedure of the cabinet or defence secretary heading an  executive committee   with token military representation  to work out the details of the higher defence structure and armed forces  reforms.ideally  an empowered committee under the defence minister   with the home minister and the nsa as the political members and a balanced representation of the military  bureaucracy and domain experts   should work in a time bound manner to finalise reforms. the ccs must give a political directive to the empowered committee. the cds  with a provisional charter  should be a member secretary of the empowered committee.the approved recommendations of the committee must be translated into a  national security bill   which can then be tabled in parliament.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe goldwater nichols act is an excellent example of how national security reforms were implemented in the us in     .the reform process will be slow and arduous  and is likely to take five years to fructify.also read  modi must appoint chief of defence staff   and prove india s political class isn t fearfula trigger for reformsthe prime minister has taken the first big step towards defence modernisation by announcing the appointment of a cds. he now has to ensure that these reforms are not derailed by inter service and military bureaucracy rivalry.the all powerful  man on the horseback  in india is not  the usurper of power   but only carries the tiranga as per the directions of the government.such instances are rare when a momentous decision triggers a chain reaction of reforms. the decision to appoint the cds is one such moment  which can trigger holistic national security reforms. the opportunity must not be lost.lt gen h s panag pvsm  avsm  r  served in the indian army for    years. he was goc in c northern command and central command. post retirement  he was member of armed forces tribunal. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




tale of two hitlers in pakistan  imran khan is a fan of good one  keeps the bad one for modi
text size  a  a my f hrer is upset again  and again the reason is narendra modi.on august     in his weekly sunday outburst on twitter  the prime minister of pakistan  imran khan informed the world that  india has been captured  as germany had been captured by nazis  by a fascist  racist hindu supremacist ideology   leadership. he apprised everyone of how the  hindu supremacist modi govt poses a threat to pakistan as well as to the minorities in india   in fact to the very fabric of nehru   gandhi s india.  according to imran khan  all one has to do  to understand the link between the nazi ideology   ethnic cleansing   genocide ideology of the rss bjp founding fathers  is  just google    something that the prime minister often fails to do himself.imran khan shared a haaretz article   hitler s hindus  the rise and rise of india s nazi loving nationalists  to make his point  which  considering he has been labelled a  jewish agent   due to his  jewish connections  through his ex wife jemima  was the first real act of courage since he came to power. seemingly on a never ending rant  the pm ascertained that india is under siege  and no one in the country   be it christians  dalits or muslims   is safe.also read  pakistan has turned its birth day into a black day. just to spite india over kashmirkhan will do what hitler couldn tnow  since when did hitler become a bad example for imran khan  only last year  he had used adolf hitler as a shining example while defending his policy of taking u turns in politics    a leader who does not know how to take u turns is not successful .  hitler and napoleon  bonaparte  suffered huge defeats and caused losses as they did not take u turns   khan was very clear.so what if hitler couldn t take u turns  imran khan will continue to do so  as the recent three year extension of army chief qamar javed bajwa s tenure showed. the pm had previously criticised pakistan people s party for giving an extension to then army chief general ashfaq parvez kayani and also reacted strongly to rumours about general raheel sharif s extension  saying that institutions should be strengthened  not individuals.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowironically  khan has also once quoted the revolutionary soviet politician  joseph stalin  to make a case for free and fair elections and  genuine democracy  in pakistan   political power does not rest with those who cast the votes  political power rests with those who count those votes.  and who counts the votes in pakistan also read  kashmir banega pakistan  a dream sold to brainwash us since childhood now lies in tattersgood hitler  bad hitlerthere are two types of hitler in pakistan. the good hitler is one that can be quoted while justifying the u turn policy. the bad hitler is the real one from germany.the opposition often calls imran khan a  hitler  for his regime s highhandedness and political witch hunt. two former prime ministers  nawaz sharif and shahid khaqqan abbasi  sharif s daughter maryam nawaz  former president asif ali zardari and his sister faryal talpur  and several pakistan muslim league  nawaz  leaders are languishing in jail over trumped up charges.when imran khan says that judges in india are afraid  the media is labelled seditious for questioning the modi government s actions  and the opposition parties there are  pushed to the wall   his opposition leaders at home turn around and ask him if he was talking about his own regime in pakistan.  if modi has pushed the opposition parties to the wall  khan is one step ahead of him. khan has pierced the opposition parties into the wall   opposition leader in the national assembly and pml n president shahbaz sharif had responded to khan in the joint sitting of parliament.in imran khan  sharif sees  all the characteristics of hitler .  prime minister imran khan is a fascist. he destroyed the country s economy  no businessman is ready to invest. also read  a meeting with imran khan is all it took to make pakistanis fall in love with donald trumppakistanis  obsession with hitlerwhen hitler is not being used by imran khan to describe modi  he is being mentioned with reverence  his military prowess is being boasted about  and his disciplinary ways is what we are being reminded we need. the systematic murder of more than six million jews and other minorities under hitler s watch serve well to fan anti semitism  as do the  yahood and hanood   jews and hindus  conspiracy theories that prop up seemingly because india has diplomatic relations with israel and pakistan doesn t.it is easy to look the other way from hitler s discrimination when the same treatment is meted out to the ahmadiyya community  whose members stand expelled from islam by a constitutional amendment in     .so  it wasn t surprising when fayaz ul hasan chohan  a minister in imran khan s cabinet and a member of pakistan tehreek e insaf  mentioned hitler as one of his  idols  in his twitter bio. or when the pti s troll army made sure to defend the nazi leader and remind us just what a great guy he was.nothing out of the ordinary for chohan  who also reveres mumtaz qadri  the assassin of punjab s former governor salmaan taseer. lover of killers of any kind. chohan also showed his hitler like tendencies when he made anti hindu remarks after the balakot airstrikes in february.chohan called hindus  cow urine drinking people who shouldn t live under the delusion that they are better than us .  what we have  you can t have  you idol worshippers   he had said. he was sacked from his post of information and culture minister but subsequently returned as minister for colonies last month.lack of historical education is one but the imposing perception of hitler as a  hard taskmaster  makes the nazi leader an instant hit among a section of pakistanis. it is something like the obsession about the  danda   stick  and about making everyone fall in line. hitler is like that mother in law who will discipline and keep a close check on you. who cares if there is more to it in history the author is a freelance journalist from pakistan. her twitter handle is  nailainayat. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




imran khan was right. modi did resolve the kashmir issue once and for all  reham khan
text size  a  a just when you thought that things couldn t possibly get any worse  the strong men who rule us demonstrated their ability to surprise us with their diplomacy and concern for humanity.as i watched our cricketing hero imran khan invite the big man in the white house to mediate on kashmir  i knew the celebration would be short lived and this will come back to haunt him.in less than a month since then  india stripped kashmir of its special status and won the war with a single flourish of the pen. jammu and kashmir s geography changed overnight as it was demoted to a union territory and its autonomy was snatched away.the valley has largely remained cut off from the world for over a fortnight now. there are rumours that many men with suspicious links have been picked up.from a humanitarian point of view  this is a gross violation of civil liberties and freedoms. but as a strategy for building an empire  it has been very successful. we can cry as much as we want  but why are we surprised also read  this is why pm modi doesn t really care about internationalisation of kashmir issuemodi delivered on his promisenarendra modi did what he said he would do. love him or hate him  he delivered on his promise. his party s manifesto had promised abrogation of article     if voted back to power. he made his intentions clear in all his interviews.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowso  when a leading news channel asks me if  modi has bowled a googly to imran   my simple answer is no.i have personally found these cricketing references tiresome and to compare the human catastrophe in kashmir to a googly is particularly distasteful. but to use the same analogy  i would say the selectors knew they were bypassing merit when they chose a bowler as their opening batsmen.young pakistanis are angrywhat is shocking is that in the past    years  pakistani children have been force fed a dream of  kashmir banega pakistan .overseas kashmiris from srinagar sussed it out a long time ago that no one was serious about listening to their demands. they told me how disillusioned they were and that they were just being used as human shields.my email and whatsapp have been flooded with angry  disappointed messages from young pakistanis   if this is how they were going to gift away kashmir to india  why were they prolonging the agony of women and children for    years i don t have the heart to remind them that i did warn them through my tv shows and during private conversations.i had seen the competencies of those drawing hefty official salaries and informal benefits for championing the kashmir cause in the us and the uk  and was far from being impressed.indeed  i had withdrawn from events organised for kashmir over the past two years  knowing fully well that these were just opportunities for lavish dinner and empty sloganeering  not to mention free travel.one kashmiri crew member remembered my show from february      wherein i had discussed imran khan s plan for a three way split of kashmir.some remembered my comment after the new pm gave interviews to indian journalists on the sidelines of the groundbreaking ceremony for kartarpur corridor last year. these young men called me up to say   ma am every word you said is turning out to be true . i replied   pray that my words don t come true .also read  why self determination for kashmir would have meant autonomy only for extremistsimran khan says he knew it allto add insult to injury  the pakistan pm stood up in parliament during a joint session only to confess that he was aware of modi s plans in kashmir. for the benefit of the public  he went in great detail to convince us that he was guilty as charged.he admitted that from the minute he took office  he was repeatedly shunned by an arrogant modi. post pulwama  he was convinced that there was no hope of a friendship with modi.one wonders why then did the kaptaan campaign for modi before the general elections in india.in april first week  the skipper assured the world that modi would resolve the issue of kashmir if re elected. since imm the dimm is a nickname imran detests  one must assume that his prediction was based on a careful analysis of the information available to him as the great leader.after all his party frequently brags about the wonderfully agreeable symbiotic relationship the government shares with the military leadership.and he was right. modi did resolve the issue once and for all. closing the door on any future dialogue on kashmir.so unprepared and clueless were the news channels in pakistan that they started a news campaign on the possible death of separatist leader yasin malik who has been in prison for months now.but  of course  our pm knew it all  he claims.also read  imran khan used modi excuse to give bajwa extension. but general can t save him from rivalsclean bowled or fixed match now imran khan has taken to twitter and parliament to educate us on the ideology of the rss  which he says resembles that of nazi germany.keen followers of the kaptaan know by now that germany and the world wars are his area of expertise. it could be his subject of choice on the tv show  mastermind  once he hangs up his pm cloaks.of course judging by his first year in power  he seems to be planning for at least a decade of progress under his visionary leadership.one is hesitant to raise a humble question in an environment where tv anchors like najam sethi find even their youtube shows being taken down.i will dare to regardless.if the writing was on the wall  why did the skipper not change his placing in the field why could he not find a gap to score a boundary was he clean bowled by modi or was it a fixed match reham khan is a journalist  child rights activist  and a single parent. she authored  reham khan   an autobiography. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this is how modi is different from other right wing populists like trump  erdogan   duterte
text size  a  a prominent right wing politicians like rodrigo duterte in the philippines  recep tayyip erdo an in turkey  narendra modi in india  viktor orb n in hungary  and donald trump in the united states have won elections based on their populist messaging and personalistic appeal.but the democratic success of populists during times of uncertainty is not new. populists on the left dominated elections in latin america in the     s and again in the     s  based on challenges to the oligarchic order and neoliberal policies. in south asia in the     s  zulfikar ali bhutto and indira gandhi came to power on the strength of appeals for radical redistribution and leveraged that appeal to subsume state institutions under their personal authority.recent right wing populists follow a similar personalist playbook of challenging the political establishment  yet their appeal to voters disaffected with the status quo is quite different. populists on the left grounded their personal appeal on their capacities to advocate for the poor and the marginalised. by contrast  reactionary populists gain power by appealing to a sense of national greatness  which  they argue  has been lost and must be regained through their political programmes.but there are also important distinctions within the universe of new right wing populists  which have important consequences in how they mobilise voters and how they govern. we argue that right wing populists  appeals to national greatness are made either through the populism of apprehension or the populism of aspiration.also read  khan market booth didn t vote for modi. this is why he projects himself as anti elitistapprehensive and aspirationalapprehensive populists emphasise fear and loss. their nostalgic rhetoric harkens back to an era when their nation was great. but they argue that this past greatness has come under threat because of the presence of immigrants and refugees  and the assertiveness of those with religious beliefs or ethnic backgrounds different from that of the majority. messages from orban and trump warn of dire consequences to the body politic and society if borders are thrown open  traditional cultures are not protected  or previous hierarchies are not re established. their project is to make the nation great again  by metaphorically turning the clock back.aspirational populists  by contrast  emphasise a national project toward future greatness. for them  the nation must constitute a single cohesive community  and it will become great  but only if everyone follows the national programme of the visionary leader. this politics of aspiration is very much at the heart of the modi vision and programme. for him  all indians must stand united  and work together  in order to implement the development of a united india that represents the principal goal of his government.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  how rss pressure forced pro business modi to turn bjp s      ship towards populismthe populism of modito be sure  there are elements of fear mongering in modi s approach to governance. these are most apparent regarding questions of corruption and national security  such as the updating of the national register of citizens in assam and the expansion of the unlawful activities  prevention  act. yet  much of his messaging highlights hope for the future  realised through the nation coming together as one. this is precisely the central theme of modi s message regarding the removal of the key elements of article      which applied to the erstwhile state of jammu and kashmir. for modi  the constitutional distinctiveness of kashmir was preventing it from being fully integrated into the nation  and thereby leading to underdevelopment and violence.apprehensive populism has a naturally chilling effect on minorities  who feel that they are being targeted directly by a populist leader. this language of divisiveness is parochial and ethnocentric. trump s recent tweets attacking elected representatives from minority communities were targeted at his most rabid white nationalist supporters  constituting a minority of the american population. this may yet prove counterproductive in future elections.also read  populism isn t the end of liberalism. it s now push backism   rahul gandhi just faced itwhy modi s aspiration can inspire fearironically  a regime of aspirational populism can be more dangerous for minorities. the message put forth by aspirational populists like modi is not openly directed against them. modi is  after all  focused on national development. yet  he won t entertain or encourage those ideas or beliefs that he thinks stand in the way of national development. in other words  aspirational populism is not pluralist. entertaining contrary beliefs or perspectives is even considered  anti national  since it challenges the path to national greatness. in doing so  modi gives the cover of respectability to those who consider the beliefs  perspectives  and customs of minorities as politically counterproductive to the overarching national goals. at the same time  opposition parties do not give voice to those who challenge the national agenda for fear of losing political support.aspirational populism can be quite fragile and could easily devolve into a darker politics. the success of modi s aspirational populism is dependent upon trajectories of continued national development. it will be undone by a military defeat  or stagnation that threatens the well being of an aspirational populist s core supporters.in india  the likelihood of war and clear military defeat is quite low. economic well being is another matter  however. if india s current economic downturn continues  modi s message of aspiration will no longer draw popular support. there is legitimate fear that aspirational populists like modi may turn to outright vilification of  anti national  elements  including minorities  with dire consequences.also read  the left is dead  but india deserves a new left that dares to think afreshlessons for left liberal populistshow does one challenge an aspirational populist like modi  a liberal political platform that focuses solely on the protection of the rights of minorities  however correct and morally defensible  can get drowned out in the din of aspirational nationalism and does not speak directly to the felt needs of the population that wants development. after all  modi s supporters will argue that the government s policies are not anti minority  but simply pro national.in a young nation like india  which still faces deep dilemmas of development across many sections of society  the only option is to construct an alternative aspirational message   one that sees the diversity of perspectives as a national strength  rather than a liability   towards a shared goal of confronting the nation s collective problems. this may require  as political commentators shivam vij and yogendra yadav have written   a new aspirational nationalism.pradeep chhibber is a professor and indo american community chair in india studies at uc berkeley. adnan naseemullah is senior lecturer in international relations at the department of war studies and an affiliate member of the india institute  kings college london. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




i told amit shah j k isn t black   white but    shades of grey. modi govt proving me right
text size  a  a by balkanizing the state of jammu   kashmir into two union territories and reconfiguring its constitutional relationship with the indian union  the nda bjp government has entered into a copse of grey whose hues  tints  tones  and shades are going to challenge the resilience of the indian state as never before.the constitutional grey  the central government ignored the explicit mandate of article three of the constitution of india   that provides that  before you gerrymander with the boundaries of a state   consultation with the legislature of that state is an essential pre requisite. for what consultation with the state legislature really implies is ascertaining the will of the people of that state. parliament must have a measure of the collective will of the people of that state in its purview before it embarks upon reorganizing that state. the method adopted by the current government has portentous implications on the entire federal scheme and the relationship between the centre and states. for what it implies is that in future the central government can put any state under president s rule  suspend dissolve its legislature and claim that now the power of the state legislature vests in parliament  the union legislature in consultation with itself has the mandate to rejig the map of india is nothing short of constitutional chicanery  to put it mildly.then the ludicrous manner in which the words  constituent assembly  in proviso to article         have been interpreted by the constitution  application to jammu and kashmir order        to read legislative assembly and since the assembly is dissolved  so in terms of article        b read with article        it means the parliament of india gives even the proverbial rubber man a run for his money.before it s accession to the indian union  jammu   kashmir was governed in terms of  the jammu   kashmir constitution act promulgated in      until it adopted its own constitution on   th of january       unlike the relationship between the rest of the princely states and the indian union. moreover para   of the instrument of accession signed by maharaja hari singh on   th october      explicitly stated  nothing in this instrument shall be deemed to commit me in any way to acceptance of any future constitution of india or to fetter my discretion to enter into arrangements with the government of india under any such future constitution.also read  prolonged violence in kashmir has led to  formidable  health crisis  lancet medical journalthough other princely states also signed similar covenants but given the prevailing state of hostilities with pakistan the situation in j k was fraught with complexity. that is why a special mechanism was adopted by the constituent assembly on    october      in the form of article     to cement the relationship between the indian union and jammu   kashmir to move it beyond the instrument of accession.the sagacity of this action evidenced itself on    november     . rajpramukhs of the princely states that had acceded to the union of india signed and adopted the constitution in its entirety  except the maharaja of the state of jammu and kashmir. now  in order to make jammu   kashmir s integration with india permanent by a reference to the people as lord louis mountbatten had promised while accepting the instrument of accession on    october       a constituent assembly was elected in jammu and kashmir. it convened on    october      and remained in session till    november      and as earlier stated adopted a constitution that came into force on    november     . it was article   of the said constitution that cemented the relationship of jammu   kashmir inalienably. it states that jammu   kashmir shall be an integral part of india and article   defined the state  as it stood constituted on    august     .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhile the government may have bifurcated the state into two parts  what happens to the constitution for the undivided state of j k  for no one can abrogate that constitution of jammu   kashmir as it has no self destruct provision in its    parts and     articles. it is concurrent to the indian constitution in terms of its article   and therefore even parliament of india cannot rescind it  for it has been framed by an elected constituent assembly much like the indian constitution itself. if one was to argue that with the bifurcation  the constitution has become a dead letter  it can equally be argued then that the relationship between india and jammu and kashmir is now back to the terms of the instrument of  accession de horse the constitutional sophistry  of     .the political grey  going all the way back to      there is a sizeable section of people in kashmir who have rooted for autonomy  self rule  independence  and merger with pakistan. all these four strains are present in the body politic of kashmir. they are intertwined and overlapped  therefore the slogan of azadi means different things to different people. however  there are also the standard bearers of the indian union in the vale of kashmir again stretching back to independence namely the national conference  nc  and the indian national congress. over a period of time  various other political outfits like the people s democratic party  pdp  founded in      also joined this endeavour that is fraught with grave personal risk and consequences both from indigenous terrorists  non state actors sponsored by the isi and organization s like the hurriyat conference.also read  over     politicians   lawyers detained in jammu   kashmir up until nowafter the last round of intense militant activity in the mid     s that saw killings of the leaders and cadres of these political parties  they have still persevered and between      and       over four assembly elections and seven parliamentary elections  they not only participated in the democratic franchise but by doing so reaffirmed their faith in the indian democratic system. the current bifurcation has completely cut the legs out from the regional parties namely the nc   pdp. what was considered to be the political mainstream in kashmir has effectively been turned into the fringe.the hurriyat and other separatists would mock them for trusting the indian state and they would have no other means of political and even physical survival but to make common cause with the hurriyat. with well organized political machinery across kashmir  it would not only have both a multiplier and domino effect but also there may be nobody left to articulate the indian point of view  to the people of j k. the repercussions of this marginalization of the political mainstream would be grave in the years to come. it is ironical that three former chief ministers of jammu   kashmir dr farooq abdullah  omar abdullah  and mehbooba mufti till recently an ally of the bjp and their families are in incarceration.the security grey  it is a well known security canon that if a militant  separatist  terrorist  revolutionary  insurgent  terrorist movement has popular people s support it is near impossible to contain it  much less neutralize it. the counterinsurgency manual authored by general david petraeus in      and applied in iraq is premised upon the following key tenets that are simple  but radical. focus on protecting civilians over killing the enemy assumes greater risk. use minimum  not maximum force. simply translated  it means winning the hearts and minds of the people. if you fail to drive a wedge between the populace and the insurgent   the insurrectionary would win.in the long war against militancy in punjab  the inflection point came when a popular government even on a thin electoral base was restored in     . within three years  punjab reaped the peace dividend and has not looked back. similarly  negotiated political settlements in assam  mizoram  tripura  and bodoland brought peace to those regions. currently  the government is negotiating to end the decades old insurgency with the underground naga. it is sheer obtuseness to remove the political buffer between delhi and srinagar and administer kashmir from new delhi.whenever there has been a direct confrontation between delhi and an alienated part of india it is the former that has lost because every grievance from a blocked municipal drain to overzealous frisking at a security checkpoint coalesces the people s anger onto delhi. that s why in kashmir  azadi  means so many different things to different people. in the present instance  not only has the buffer been removed but also the entire political mainstream has been obliterated with the sword of bifurcation. there would be serious implications down the line.the strategic grey  pakistan is back in the game not only in kashmir but also in the region. after being the pariah of the beltway post osama bin laden era  it has risen like the proverbial phoenix to become the sweetie pie of washington dc once again. the us needs pakistan ever more. if the us  surrenders  to the taliban  then the taliban would succeed. moreover  with the iranian issue back on the front burner  pakistan will have a role to play in the us scheme of things. whatever militant capacity the us  taliban deal would free up  it will all come to kashmir. the taliban fighters perceive conflict jihad  martyrdom as the normal. they are not going back to a pastoral existence. a child born in afghanistan in      when the soviet invasion took place today would be forty years old. for him  death  destruction  cruelty  and conflict is a way of life and then there is always the isis to fill the vacuum if the demobilized afghan fighters are unwilling to become guns for the pakistani deep state. rather than carry out this obtuseness the government needed to apply the healing touch to bring the people closer rather than alienating them.also read  to understand modi s new kashmir reality  these   liberal myths need to be brokenthe international grey  india s whole case for the return of pok and the northern territories rests on the article of accession  an article of the jammu and kashmir constitution and two resolutions of parliament in      and      which states that the only unfinished business of partition are those parts of j k which are illegally occupied by pakistan and ceded to china. while the instrument of accession does not delineate the boundaries of jammu   kashmir it is article   of the j k constitution that defines them.  the territory of the state shall comprise all the territories which on    august      were under the sovereignty or suzerainty of the ruler of the state . now with the dismemberment of the original state of j k  that particular claim becomes a non sequitur. for in both bilateral and multilateral negotiations india would not be able to say that we are wanting control over the original state of j k as acceded to india on the    october      by maharaja hari singh as that state no longer exists. this unraveling of j k has weakened our case in the chanceries and conference rooms of the world.that is why i told the home minister in the lok sabha on   august       that jammu   kashmir is not black and white   there are  fifty shades of grey  in between.the author is a lawyer  congress  lok sabha mp from anandpur sahib  former union minister of information and broadcasting  and distinguished senior fellow atlantic council   washington dc. his twitter handle is  manishtewari.this article was first published on orf.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




imran khan used modi excuse to give bajwa extension. but general can t save him from rivals
text size  a  a on    august  imran khan completed a year as the prime minister of pakistan. the very next day he announced that the tenure of pakistan army chief general qamar javed bajwa will be extended by three years. earlier  he was set to retire on    november  but after the extension  he will now remain the army chief till    november     .why did imran khan give general bajwa a three year extension as army chief convincing the general i remember when the government of the pakistan peoples party  ppp  gave a three year extension to then pakistan army chief general ashfaq parvez kayani in       it was imran khan who had criticised then pm yousaf raza gilani and said   if you want to make pakistan strong  you must make its institutions strong and institutions can only become strong when you don t give preference to individuals over institutions .in several of his interviews  imran khan had said that even if a country is fighting a war  its army chief should not be given an extension.but in the last one year  imran khan has made many u turns   the latest was this monday when general bajwa was given an extension  in view of the regional security environment .pakistan s foreign minister shah mehmood qureshi further mentioned the situation in kashmir and afghanistan as reasons for the decision on general bajwa. he said   a clear message was being conveyed to india that there was continuation and clarity in the political and military leadership in pakistan. during recent briefings and meetings  general bajwa had said more than once that he was not interested in an extension.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbut a few weeks ago  some tv channels claimed that pm imran khan had decided to extend the tenure of general bajwa  and he would make an announcement at an appropriate time. the prime minister s office did not deny this  giving fuel to the speculation that imran khan was trying to convince the general to accept an extension in service tenure.also read  imran khan had once opposed extension for army chief. today  he s given onebajwa and sharifin       general bajwa was the corps commander of rawalpindi when imran khan was staging a protest in front of parliament house and demanding the resignation of then pm nawaz sharif.the general impression in those days was that the military establishment was supporting imran khan against nawaz sharif. bajwa emerged as one of the pro democracy generals who advised his boss general raheel sharif that army should not interfere in politics.raheel sharif wanted not only an extension but also the title of field marshal. then pm nawaz sharif refused to oblige him and appointed qamar javed bajwa as the new army chief  who was not even the most senior in the service at that time.bajwa enjoyed excellent relations with nawaz sharif  but the situation changed in april      when the panama papers scandal hit the sharifs  finally leading to the pakistan supreme court disqualifying nawaz from holding public office in     .why bajwa is important for pmimran khan was one of the luckiest pms of pakistan in     . when he became pakistan s prime minister  both army and judiciary supported him. yet  he was not able to bring a change in pakistan s policies or politics.it is not just the  regional security situation  that forced imran khan to give an extension to general bajwa. many in pakistan believe that imran khan cannot survive without bajwa. he has privately praised bajwa many times.  i became prime minister because like me general bajwa also believes in naya pakistan   imran khan has said in the past.imran khan s naya pakistan has failed to provide any economic relief to the common people of pakistan. in april  the pm replaced finance minister asad umar with abdul hafeez sheikh  who was the finance minister in the ppp government. even this change yielded no positive results.it was not the job of the army chief to run here and there  asking for economic aid  but still general bajwa did it. it is widely believed that the general visited saudi arabia  uae and china  and arranged for some loans  giving the imran khan government some breathing space.but imran khan s popularity has nosedived since then. last month  opposition parties in pakistan held rallies against the government  accusing it of destroying the economy and muzzling its critics.also read  pakistan s india policy set to get more rigid as general bajwa gets expected extensioncan bajwa defend the government just when things were getting difficult at home  the narendra modi government announced abrogation of article     and bifurcation of jammu and kashmir into two union territories. the india pakistan tension is a blessing in disguise for imran khan. it has helped him divert people s attention from pakistan s economic woes to the threat of a war with india.imran khan s announcement regarding tenure extension of general bajwa came on a day when opposition parties met in islamabad and decided to launch a mass movement against  fascist  imran khan. his government arrested nawaz sharif s daughter maryam on   august when she was meeting her father in jail. last week  faryal talpur  sister of ppp co chairperson asif ali zardari  was shifted from hospital to jail against doctor s advice.will general bajwa rescue imran khan from a possible mass movement by the opposition an army chief can fight a foreign enemy  but it s not easy to fight political opponents of a civilian government. it is expected that general bajwa will be more careful in his second term by not getting involved in political battles inside pakistan. his immediate challenge is to defuse the india pakistan tension and push afghan taliban for a peace agreement with washington.the political and military leadership are on the same page in terms of tackling the  regional security situation . but the same security situation may force general bajwa to defend only pakistan  and not the government of pakistan.also read  this is general bajwa s dilemma after modi govt s article     move in kashmirthe author works for geo tv and tweets  hamidmirpak. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




if modi govt wants to control population  it must target high fertility rates in these states
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi s concerns over population explosion are warranted. even if fertility in india were to immediately drop to replacement levels  india is still projected to add over     million or   .  crore people between      and     .there is no historical precedence for modern democratic governments  which uphold individual liberties  to equitably and effectively provide for a billion plus population. while china s experience is inevitably invoked in conversations on population size  the country s unique political regime and coercive policies offer no feasible knowledge transfer to the democratic set up in india.the challenge for india lies in how it can effectively chart its unique path in ensuring sustainable and equitable development for its billion plus people.also read  does modi s population control call signal india unable to leverage demographic dividend large population  limited resourcepm narendra modi s call for population control in his independence day speech came in the backdrop of a consistent decline in national fertility in india  from a total fertility rate  tfr  of  .   in the     s to  .  in      to a near replacement fertility of  .  in     .  total fertility rate refers to the total number of children born or likely to be born to a woman in her lifetime if she were subject to the prevailing rate of age specific fertility in the population. and yet  with a current population of  .   billion or     crore  india is set to overthrow china as the world s most populous country by     .concerns of population sizes outstripping the limited global resources are not new. first articulated by thomas malthus in       these ideas have found voice throughout history. however  their critics have prevailed for the most part. accelerated economic development through technological progress  increased productivity and improved standards of living meant malthusian doomsday predictions never reached fruition.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowby the end of the   th century  there was a notable shift in the lexicon of population policy  from  population control  to  family planning  to  reproductive and gender rights . giving salience to the principle of individual choice in reproductive decisions was key to this transition. it appears that on matters of family size  societies  with the exception of china  have overwhelmingly leaned in favour of individuals over the state.state has a role to playgiven india s own experience with forced sterilisation in       there is no doubt that any future population policy should continue to ensure and accelerate free will  particularly that of women. this does not imply that the state is a silent spectator. rather its role is seen to create conditions  which could implicitly or explicitly influence individuals  behaviour towards the desired goal of  smaller  families.of these  conditions   a clear one is to influence the age at which a woman gets married. increasing the age of marriage  and by extension  delaying the likelihood of having a child   along with birth spacing and prolonged postpartum infertility are critical determinants of natural fertility.other   more control based   strategies to avoid pregnancy that appear to work include improved access and incentivisation of contraception  and access to abortion. a      study based on six asian countries including india  bangladesh  nepal  philippines  indonesia and vietnam found access to contraceptives and increase in the marital age to be the most important determinants of controlled and natural fertility. indeed  these specific factors operate within  and are influenced by  the broader social and economic factors  such as education of girls and employment of women  urbanisation  improved job opportunities and increases in family incomes.the good news is that india is steadily making progress on these socio economic determinants  but improvements are highly uneven across india.also read  on world population day  a look at how we became  .  billion people   where india standsdecoding the dataeven as national fertility has been declining steadily  states like bihar   .    uttar pradesh      madhya pradesh   .    rajasthan   .    jharkhand   .    chhattisgarh   .     which together account for nearly half of india s population     per cent    continue to have very high fertility rates. meanwhile  states like kerala   .    karnataka   .    maharashtra   .    tamil nadu   .    west bengal   .   are now well below replacement fertility  mirroring the levels in countries like france   .     iceland   .    and norway   .     according to united nation s latest revised estimates in     .any future family planning in india has to effectively locate itself within the broader socio economic factors and target the high tfr states. an obvious way is to ensure effective implementation of legislation on the age of marriage of women. child marriage continues to be an important concern in all states reporting high fertility.national family health survey  nfhs  data shows that states with high fertility still have very high proportions of women marrying before the legal age. forty two per cent women in bihar     per cent in jharkhand and one third of the women in rajasthan and madhya pradesh marry before the age of   . in these states  keeping girls in schools is intrinsically linked to marriage and fertility trends.nfhs data shows that    per cent of women with no schooling begin childbearing at       years  against   per cent of women with at least    years of schooling. women with no schooling have a lifetime fertility rate of  .   against  .  for women who complete schooling. targeting female literacy  absenteeism and school dropout rates in states with high fertility is critically important.nfhs data reveals that against a   per cent national unmet need for spacing among women aged       years  bihar s stands at    per cent and uttar pradesh s at    per cent. against    per cent women at a national level  only    per cent women in bihar use any contraceptive method. continued investment in effective campaigns to educate women on birth spacing and post partum infecundability  and improved access and incentivisation of locally accepted scientific means of contraception in these states are needed.don t blame poor  don t burden womenwe hasten to add that any public policy approach should be highly cognisant of not  blaming the poor . leaving aside the vexing issue of which one causes which  poverty and high fertility share a strong correlation. fertility rates of women in the lowest wealth quintile is  .  against  .  for women in the highest wealth quintile. only   per cent of teenaged women in the top    per cent of the wealth index begin childbearing in contrast to    per cent in the bottom    per cent.rhetoric heavy public statements that conflate family size with  patriotism  or  nationalism  are unwarranted  and unfairly  even if unintended   blame the poor .a course correction is also needed in not placing the responsibility of family planning solely on women  inadvertently or otherwise.consider sterilisation. female sterilisation has continued to far surpass male sterilisation in india. a recent         report from the national health mission found that   .  per cent of all sterilisation procedures were performed on women. female sterilisation has also been the most common contraceptive method for married couples. among currently married women  nfhs data shows     per cent use female sterilisation  followed by male condoms    per cent  and pills    per cent . it is time for public policy on family planning to actively promote principles of collective action and shared responsibilities.also read   keeping one s family small an act of patriotism   pm modi calls for population controlgo beyond numberspopulation policy cannot be a matter of numbers alone  even when  on occasion  the  numbers  may be desirable.for instance  india s largely young population is often seen as a potential force that can power the country s economic engine. at the same time  concerns over environmental sustainability of conventional economic development strategies are becoming increasingly urgent.in this context  it is worth recalling mahatma gandhi s discerning words that  the world has enough for everyone s need  not everyone s greed .pritha chatterjee is a phd student in population health sciences at harvard university. s.v. subramanian is professor of population health and geography at harvard university. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this is why pm modi doesn t really care about internationalisation of kashmir issue
text size  a  a late monday evening  us president donald trump called prime minister narendra modi. according to official sources  their    minute conversation was  even better than the press release .the indian officials sounded quite relieved. there has been a lot of bitterness in the india us relationship of late  marked by trump telling reporters  as he stood beside pakistan prime minister imran khan at the white house  that modi had asked him to mediate between india and pakistan on kashmir   the indian government promptly denied the us president s comments.even the spat on bilateral trade remains unresolved. it seems that us trade representative robert lighthizer has found little time to meet with commerce minister piyush goyal  even though delhi is ready to roll back additional tariffs on several us products.last week  though  the americans came out in support of delhi when china  speaking on behalf of pakistan  sought to castigate delhi at the closed door meetings of the un security council called to discuss kashmir. along with france and russia  the us prevented a formal statement from being issued.also read  trump calls up modi   imran separately  calls for restraint in  tough  kashmir situationimran khan s insecuritytrump s monday call is important because it vindicates india s position that the abrogation of article     is an  internal matter . modi evidently told the us president that  certain leaders in the region   namely imran khan  were indulging in  extreme rhetoric and incitement to anti india violence  .certainly  khan has outdone himself on the rhetoric front. a series of tweets on the weekend exposed both his insecurity and anger we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowindia has been captured  as germany had been captured by nazis  by a fascist  racist hindu supremacist ideology   leadership.this threatens  m kashmiris under siege in iok for over   weeks which shd have sent alarm bells ringing across the world with un observers being sent there   imran khan   imrankhanpti  august         now that the un observers haven t caught a plane to srinagar and even trump doesn t particularly look like he cares whether the two warring neighbours reach a nuclear flashpoint over kashmir   he is probably more concerned about china massing armed police and armoured personnel carriers in nearby shenzhen  within spitting distance of hongkong    it might be time for pakistan to think up a real trick or two.also read  modi speaks to trump  says anti india rhetoric not good for peacewhy trump called modiso  what happened  why did trump call modi the answer  perhaps  lies in pakistan ambassador to the us asad majeed khan s comments to the new york times a week ago. he said that in the wake of the abrogation of article      the pakistanis may have to redeploy their troops from the afghan theatre to kashmir.considering trump was counting so much on the pakistanis to deliver the afghan timetable for peace  so that us troops could get back home as quickly as possible  asad majeed s comments may have hit a raw nerve.certainly  majeed cannot be faulted for thinking about blackmail in these tough times. with the financial action task force  fatf  noose closing in  the pakistani  miltablishment   or  military establishment  as friday times editor najam sethi puts it  has less and less money to pay for the conflict that has been bleeding india for decades.also read  trump is no fool   this is why he deliberately lied about modi s kashmir requestimran khan s troublesso  what happens when pakistan is broke within and friendless without  remember  only china came to its help at the unsc last week. moreover  how long is china going to bail out its client state when it has its own problems  like hong kong  to think about poor imran khan. he is so completely out of his depth playing prime minister that he has even outsourced the running of the state to his army chief general qamar javed bajwa  by extending him for another three years.the bigger question remains  does gen. bajwa s  miltablishment  want to keep quiet in the face of the massacre of innocent shias in a wedding hall in kabul in which    people died  all civilians  the islamic state has taken responsibility for the attack   evidently  the is has been responsible for    attacks between           in afghanistan   which allows gen. bajwa to get away with the charade that the taliban is hardly as dangerous.as for kashmir  the world remains watchful for signs of human rights violations in that union territory. france  germany and others will do a u turn at the sight of greater tension in the valley. but one thing is clear  the international community is not about to challenge narendra modi s unilateral abrogation of article    .nor does modi particularly care about phrases like  internationalisation  or the  will of the people  of kashmir that the world  for decades  has used to rap india on the knuckles with.also read  china says india s kashmir move  unacceptable   undermines its territorial sovereigntyeye to eye with chinaas for china  the trump call serves another purpose  which is that it allows new delhi to look beijing in the eye. remember that chinese president xi jinping is coming to india in october   and despite the fact that china took kashmir to the un security council  neither has called off the meeting or said anything critical about it.this compartmentalisation of foreign policy tells us two things  first  that china wants a decent relationship with india  for fear of india taking us help to become the next asian power. second  support for  iron brother  pakistan comes at a huge price.modi will now follow up his conversation with trump by flying off to countries like france and uae later this week  which came out in support of india s  kashmir is an internal matter  statement. modi will be back in biarritz  france  for the g  meeting on    august  where india is a partner country and therefore can sit only in some meetings.remember that the big boys   and angela merkel   will be at biarritz. certainly  modi isn t letting a photo opportunity like that slip by. as he told trump on the phone  he is in new york next month for the un general assembly meetings. on the other hand  they may just say hello in biarritz.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india s no first use is badass enough. modi govt needn t change it to be more muscular
text size  a  a a day after india s   rd independence day  the narendra modi government threatened pakistan with the possibility of a nuclear attack if it scales up cross border terrorism and militancy against india. that is essentially what the last eight words of defence minister rajnath singh s tweet conveyed   while india has hitherto  strictly adhered to  the no first use doctrine   what happens in future depends on the circumstances .welcome to modi s new security doctrine. and take a deep breath.as ambiguous and casual as it may seem at first glance  it is a signal to the pakistani military jihadi complex that india could well strike first with nuclear weapons in a war triggered by pakistani cross border terrorism.but while abandoning the nuclear no first use  nfu  doctrine might appear more muscular in popular psychology  it is the nfu itself that is more badass. if you are prepared to wipe out a whole country in retaliation to them using a low yield nuke against your troops  can anyone be more badass than you also read  india committed to no first use nuke policy  but  future depends on circumstances   rajnaththere s more to rajnath s messagemy instinctive response to rajnath singh s tweet was to dismiss it as an off the cuff remark that got instantly amplified in the longstanding debate over india s no first use doctrine. reflecting on it over the weekend  and putting it in the context of the balakot airstrikes  modi s election speeches on nuclear weapons  and the prospect of unrest in post article     kashmir  it now appears to me that rajnath singh s message was deliberate  the words were carefully chosen  and the intended recipient was pakistan s military jihadi complex.and here s the logic behind it  for the past two decades  india lacked effective options to deter cross border terrorists protected by pakistan s nuclear umbrella. a conventional retaliation could be threatened only after high profile attacks such as those on parliament in      and in mumbai on      . but because of the risk   well advertised by pakistan   that an actual indian retaliation could invite low yield nuclear weapons  use on indian forces or cities  new delhi stopped short of war.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis changed in february       when modi ordered a conventional retaliatory response inside pakistani territory following an attack on a military convoy in pulwama. this set a new benchmark   binding modi and his successors to respond in a similar or stronger manner. unlike this year  situations in future could escalate and the indian armed forces might have to take the war into pakistan  rubbing against pakistan s nuclear red lines.this is where rajnath singh s statement comes in  if pakistan were to threaten a nuclear strike  or if new delhi were to believe that a strike was in the offing  india would strike first. the modi government appears to have calculated that the fear of an indian nuclear strike will raise pakistan s costs of cross border terrorism  thus deterring its use.also read  modi govt must be cajoled  nudged   criticised into giving us a national security doctrinepart of modi s security doctrineto be clear  no one in the government has said as much  and this is entirely my assessment sitting       km away from new delhi. yet  the contours of a modi security doctrine are emerging  from publicised surgical strikes across the line of control  loc  to airstrikes deep into pakistani territory to an implicit nuclear threat  the modi government seeks to contain pakistani adventurism through a readiness to use force at all levels. a lot of scholars have strung doctrines around modi s neck  but whatever you might think of it  this is the real deal.obviously  this is an extremely risky approach. india has shown itself capable of absorbing all the terrorism and militancy that pakistan has thrown its way over the years and still doing well. so  it is not immediately apparent that india needs to adopt a path that leads to nuclear crises at worst and demands more resources for running a nuclear arms race at best. the modi government  it would seem  has decided that the risks and the costs are worth it.also read  from afspa to street protests  modi govt needs new thinking in j k with article     gonethere s a reason why nfu existsthe biggest problem with this bold new approach is that it will work only to the extent that the pakistanis believe india s threats are credible. pakistan might calculate that it can take the risk  make some tactical innovations  and continue the proxy war in other ways. fear of a pre emptive strike might cause the pakistanis to put more weapons on hair trigger alert  disperse them more and devolve the authority to launch the weapons. this creates more risk for india and for other countries.there s another big problem  it is absurd to believe that a pre emptive first strike can destroy pakistan s ability to hit back. no combination of a comprehensive first strike and ballistic missile defence can ensure indian cities are safe. if it was about mutually assured destruction  mad  during the cold war  it is about mutually unacceptable damage  mud  between india and pakistan. it took the united states and the soviet union decades  hundreds of billions of dollars  and thousands of warheads to realise that a nuclear war is unwinnable  and nuclear weapons are meant to deter such a war. the first generation of india s nuclear strategists learned this lesson well  which is why we have a no first use doctrine. the next generation ought not to make the mistakes its predecessors avoided.if the above assessment is right  then as scholars vipin narang and christopher clary have argued for some time  the no first use doctrine has effectively been severely qualified   in that it doesn t apply  at least  to pakistan. but before the modi government irrevocably proceeds along this path  it should consider the alternative  a global no first use  gnfu  treaty that will bind all nuclear powers. to the extent that such a treaty has similar effect   preventing pakistan from threatening nuclear attack   it may be a more effective  less risky and cheaper option. moreover  if gnfu does not come about  india can always do what it must do.the author is the director of the takshashila institution  an independent centre for research and education in public policy. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




tears and laughter   what the opposition needs to beat modi
text size  a  a drew westen  a professor of psychology in atlanta  us  struggled with a political question in the early     s. why was it that surveys showed american people agreeing with democrats on most issues  but when it came to voting  democrats were doing poorly to understand this  he conducted political experiments on the brain in     . he showed political messages to democrat and republican supporters and scanned their brains to see how the brain reacts. he found that the human brain responds to politics more through emotion than reason.when a democrat supporter was shown a message depicting a democratic party leader in a bad light  the brain quickly found ways to rationalise it  and once that was done  the emotional part of the brain lit up again.the experiments proved that  confirmation bias  had a scientific basis and why politically partisan people loved fake news like a drug addiction. but they also explained what democrats had been doing wrong and the republicans had been doing right  using emotions in political messaging.also read  how india s liberals and opposition can start winning the battle of ideasslave to emotionfrom these experiments came out the book the political brain in     . it immediately became a rage in the democratic circles and influenced the democratic party s thinking about its messaging around the time of the first obama campaign. westen did not directly work on the obama campaign  but joe biden and bill clinton were among the people who asked democrats to take the book seriously. westen wrote a pamphlet for democrats titled   message handbook for progressives from left to center .since then  the political brain has become a hugely influential book in politics across the world. it could not be more relevant in today s india. you can replace democrats with the congress and republicans with the bjp and book would make a lot of sense in india.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwesten writes in his book   the brain registers the conflict between data and desire and begins to search for ways to turn off the spigot of unpleasant emotion.  which is why  the political brain is an emotional brain. it is not a dispassionate calculating machine  objectively searching for the right facts  figures  and policies to make a reasoned decision .westen cites a lot of research to prove his point  but philosopher david hume said it nearly three centuries ago  reason is a slave to emotion passion. democrats  westen writes  have an  irrational emotional commitment to rationality .emotion makes us reasonthe human mind uses both emotion and reason together. people who have lost one of these faculties in accidents  for instance  are unable to function normally. to sell reason  liberals will have to use emotion first.westen writes   we do not pay attention to arguments unless they engender our interest  enthusiasm  fear  anger  or contempt. we are not moved by leaders with whom we do not feel an emotional resonance. we do not find policies worth debating if they don t touch on the emotional implications for ourselves  our families  or things we hold dear. from the standpoint of research in neuroscience  the more purely  rational  an appeal  the less it is likely to activate the emotion circuits that regulate voting behaviour. think of every successful politician or for that matter any public figure. you will see that they evoke emotions in people  and they do so partly because they use emotions in their messaging. this is true of narendra modi or shah rukh khan  steve jobs or benazir bhutto. one politician who just doesn t appeal to emotion at all is rahul gandhi.the hesitation in using emotions is a major reason why the congress  and liberal politics in india at large have lost the ability to influence the masses.india s prime minister narendra modi channelises emotions so often that sometimes his eyes become moist. whether or not it is an act  it is definitely a political design. he especially gets emotional when he talks about his humble roots.the congress is the party of mahatma gandhi  the father of the nation  of jawaharlal nehru  the maker of modern india  of indira and rajiv gandhi  who gave up their lives for india. yet  the bjp manages to own nationalism partly because the congress doesn t use emotions while reaching out to the people with its ideas and icons.the congress party  and especially rahul gandhi try to appeal to reason. rahul gandhi s big failure has been the inability evoke emotions in people. arvind kejriwal s decline in national politics has mirrored the decline in his ability to emotionally charge up people.also read  modi s kashmir move is biggest test for indian democracy   and for the silent liberalsit s the way you make me feel in politics  when reason and emotion collide  emotion invariably wins   westen writes. the trouble is that liberals have come to associate emotional messaging with right wing demagoguery and fascism. in doing so  liberals are denying science. they are denying how the human brain works.westen writes   it is clear that  feelings  are millions of years older than the kind of conscious thought processes we call  reason  and they have been guiding behaviour for far longer .the use of emotion is not always evil. it doesn t have to be designed to make people discriminate and kill.  emotions channel behaviour in directions that maximise our survival  reproduction  and care for the welfare of others in whom we are emotionally invested   westen writes.a good comparison here would be how modi sells the ujjwala scheme to give free gas cylinders to households and how the congress has  not  sold the right to food or indeed any of the upa s rights based schemes. modi will remind you of the suffering of mothers  the congress will give you a statistic.the day india can find a liberal politician who knows how to use emotions in messaging  narendra modi and the bjp will start losing elections. take the ongoing economic slowdown and rising unemployment rates  for instance.have you heard any opposition leader trying to make you feel what it is like to be unemployed  has a single opposition leader made you empathise with the automobile factory worker who has returned to his her village after losing the job  and doesn t know what s he can do to earn a living again  the day an opposition leader can make you feel for the dispossessed in modi s india  the modi story will be over.westen writes   you know you have a good candidate when he or she can make you laugh  move you to tears  enunciate your shared values in a way that puts a shiver down your spine  deliver a eulogy or address a national tragedy in a way that puts a lump in your throat  criticise the other side with a sharp joke that is so disarming that you barely realise it s more than a scratch until you see the bandage  and elicit moral outrage so powerful you want to go to the polls tomorrow. also read  how liberals lost gandhi as they lost their own intellectual mooringsviews are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




not terrorists  congress or voters  this is who scares pm modi the most
text size  a  a the post truth world believes perception is reality. prime minister narendra modi looks invincible. his popularity only increases   year after year  election after election. with majority support  it seems like only he could have abrogated article     the way he did or criminalised triple talaq or won with a massive mandate even after demonetisation and downfall of the economy.and yet  modi is fearful. who can possibly scare the prime minister  not terrorists  trade unionists  voters or opposition leaders  but a small group of intellectuals. the thinkers of india.the bjp likes to disparagingly call them the  khan market gang  or the  lutyens  club .also read  khan market booth didn t vote for modi. this is why he projects himself as anti elitistno bolshevik revolution hereindia s intellectuals are not plotting a bolshevik revolution to overthrow the modi government. but the troika   narendra modi  amit shah and ajit doval   treat them with nothing but contempt and suspicion. and now republic tv s arnab goswami has called them the  negativity gang .what happened to  sickular  or  jholawalas  or  ngo types   one wonders.the bjp s social media machinery aggressively and viciously trolls this community. sometimes  even supporters of modi criticise his policies or statements. but the troll armies do not spare them either. they are instantly thrown into the khan market club. there is no mercy petition be it a mohandas pai or a tavleen singh.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis so called class of intellectuals or media commentators is not united. their ideologies are as diverse as the fifty shades of grey  like manish tewari likes to say. they do not belong to any political party. indeed  they take huge pride in being totally  independent . but modi s bjp likes to treat them as one bloc.and it s not like they criticise only the bjp. india s intellectuals want sonia gandhi to take certain major steps and they advise rahul gandhi on how to be a leader. they write extensively on what the left  in general  and communists  in particular  should do to come out of the irrelevance they are currently in. but none of them directly participate in any party fora.i would not call them armchair pontiffs. nor would i condemn them as self centred bystanders  unwilling to take the plunge in politics. most of them genuinely want to keep freedoms intact and scholarship alive. they do not want to fall prey to party discipline or tightly binding ideology. this class believes that the powers that be are afraid of ideas  debates and intellectual exchange.also read  time modi   amit shah stop abusing lutyens  delhi. they are the new power elite in capitala harmless communityso  in what way are they a threat to the vast power structure narendra modi has in his command  or how can they make a dent in his charisma  manufactured or real   they have no mass following  beyond khan market or lutyens  delhi. they can only impress each other in the seminars at the india international centre or the habitat centre. they gossip privately.politically  this community is totally harmless. these intellectual groups exist in most countries. for instance  in the us  this community is sardonically known as the  boston brahmins . in england  in the post aristocratic era  the university educated elite acquired that status. george bernard shaw  in his famous play pygmalion  characterises them as vain parasites.in communist russia  this intellectual lot was called the nomenklatura  though their vanity and status came from their proximity to the state or party bosses. the indian communist parties too had their own  marxist brahmins   who dictated and dominated the politburo   the bhadralok in bengal. today  the brahminical hold over this community is still deep and wide.also read  why the lack of approval from lutyens  delhi bothers narendra modi so muchwhat scares modibut why does narendra modi hold this class in such utter contempt  is it deep rooted in the  anti brahminism  of the obcs  for the last few years  modi has been wearing his obc status on his sleeve. but there is a paradox. the rss  even today  is extremely brahmin dominated. although  there was a conscious effort when balasaheb deoras became the sarsanghchalak to promote obcs in the party.there are often reports from within the sangh parivar that the rss and modi are not on the same page. occasionally there is hush hush talk about the rss hostility towards modi. the rss apparatchiks say that the sangh has always been against a personality cult.but modi s power flows from that personality cult. if the cult goes  power vanishes. so  there are constant efforts to preserve the image. press conferences or real interaction with the media can damage the image. so  the scripted interviews continue.arnab goswami would be better than ravish kumar. conversation with akshay kumar is better than with ramachandra guha. prasoon joshi is more suitable than pritish nandy. monologue  mann ki baat  is better than dialogue.neither the modi government nor the sangh parivar has intellectuals in their vast armies. even though brahmin  most in the khan market gang are brought up on western intellectual and literary diet. so  they do not join the hindutva bandwagon. some of them prefer to be quiet fellow travellers of the parivar.modi feels intellectually vulnerable in their company.also read  how india s liberals and opposition can start winning the battle of ideasno country for intellectualsthe mediocre is always afraid and hateful of the  buddhijivi . their inferiority complex and lack of comprehension of multi dimensional reality make their choices limited. they prefer simplistic solutions to complex issues   like for ram mandir  triple talaq  beef  yoga  etc.modi is at once a product of the mediocrity of the sangh and a megalomaniac personality. so  he feels threatened by clever people who challenge his facts and narrative. he tries to create the world in his own image. he is not happy to be just a prime minister. he wants to be a world statesman. the pliant media helps in this image making process.modi s attack on khan market and lutyens  delhi is a reflection of his acute insecurity. instead of facing the opposition  he runs them down in public  instead of arguing with reason  he creates a fog of faith. instead of meeting the press  he meets embedded editors and bonded members of parliament.the indian nomenklatura and the boston brahmins in khan market threaten his carefully crafted image. he knows that if the image cracks  his days as pm will be numbered. so  condemn the thinkers of india to rally around the mass of mediocrity.the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




who has groomed bjp s future leaders better  vajpayee advani or modi shah 
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi and home minister amit shah have taken the bjp to new heights  much higher than what the duo of atal bihari vajpayee and l.k. advani ever could. but there is one kra   key result area   in which the jury is still out on modi shah s record as compared to the bjp founder members   grooming future leaders.not that the prime minister and the bjp president haven t worked on this kra. they have installed more new faces in positions of power than their predecessors did. of the    bjp chief ministers today     are greenhorns who owed their ascension solely to modi and shah. only karnataka s b.s. yediyurappa  an old war horse  can claim to have  earned  the coveted post without much backing from them.also read  how modi s bjp has become nehru s congressvajpayee advani nurtured bjp s best cropthere are    bjp leaders who were in vajpayee s last council of ministers and who are still around today. of those  only six have made it to modi  .  council of ministers   rajnath singh  ravi shankar prasad  prahlad singh patel  santosh gangwar  shripad yesso naik  and faggan singh kulaste. of the remaining     m. venkaiah naidu has made it to the vice president s office while c. vidyasagar rao and ramesh bais have got accommodation in mumbai and agartala raj bhawans. the rest have fallen by the wayside  left to lick their wounds. but they can t grudge modi his resolve to promote a new set of leaders.these facts run counter to the common perception about vajpayee and advani having done a lot better in nurturing next generation of bjp leaders. that s probably because of the quality of leaders they nurtured  narendra modi  arun jaitley  late sushma swaraj  ravi shankar prasad  late pramod mahajan  rajnath singh  nitin gadkari  shivraj singh chouhan  vasundhara raje  and raman singh among many others. you name any bjp leader worth his her salt in public life today and all of them owe it to vajpayee advani. now look at the crop of leaders who have been promoted by modi and amit shah  dharmendra pradhan  piyush goyal  bhupendra yadav  prakash javadekar  nirmala sitharaman  kailash vijayvargiya  muralidhar rao  and the likes of giriraj singh and d.v. sadananda gowda. the less said about the qualitative difference between the two groups  the better.also read  unlike vajpayee   advani  gen next bjp leaders groomed by modi shah don t look promisingmodi s success stopped at shahmodi and shah must be conscious of the extreme limitations of the leaders they have promoted. they couldn t help it though. the bjp has poor bench strength. besides  the two together don t need much talent around  anyway.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhat modi and shah have invested in heavily is the new generation of leaders in states. don t forget  few outside gujarat knew about shah until modi pitchforked him to the national centre stage. and what an extraordinary find shah has been for the bjp  the two have since been trying to create a new breed of leaders in states. the success or failure of their endeavour would answer the question that we set out to explore at the beginning  who groomed the bjp s future leadership better   vajpayee advani or modi shah the first indication of whether modi has been able to create mass leaders and not parasites thriving on his popularity will be clear in september october when haryana  maharashtra and jharkhand go to polls. modi and shah had picked three greenhorns to rule these states   manohar lal khattar  devendra fadnavis and raghubar das. it s time for these chief ministers to vindicate their leaders  decision in the coming assembly elections. these polls will be the first litmus test of the first set of chief ministers picked by modi.modi wave and a new bjpin his first term  the bjp rode on  modi wave  to sweep its political adversaries out of power from one state after another  except from a few pockets such as aam aadmi party led delhi  trinamool congress led west bengal  biju janata dal led odisha  and the southern states. but this wave wasn t very effective when the bjp chief ministers  of pre modi era  faced anti incumbency.the bjp virtually lost goa in      but outmanoeuvred the congress to form a coalition government. the party also lost rajasthan  madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh last year. but the chief ministers of all these states were not modi appointees. vasundhara raje  shivraj singh chouhan and raman singh were all from vajpayee era  though all of them did benefit from the early gust of modi wave in the      assembly elections. they were all strong and popular leaders who were once gujarat chief minister modi s counterparts. they were never seen as modi s regents in states the way his appointees are seen.also read  from modi s eleven in      to only namo in       the modi fication of bjp is now completebjp s hope   modi picked cmsthat s why there is much at stake for modi in jharkhand  maharashtra and haryana elections. to be fair to the three chief ministers   khattar  fadnavis and das   they have done their best to model themselves on modi and their governance on modi s. all three have ensured that there is not a stain on their clean image. das calls himself labourer no.   on the lines of  pradhan sevak  that the prime minister calls himself. khattar has publicly acknowledged he follows gujarat model of governance  obviously believing that modi still drives it in his home state.whenever there is a new scheme to be rolled out  khattar sends a message to his bureaucrats   find out how gujarat is implementing it. he wouldn t meddle in recruitments because one of his predecessors  om prakash chautala  is in jail for doing so. and he wouldn t acquire land for any project because it got another predecessor  bhupinder singh hooda  in trouble. there have been murmurs and whispers in mumbai s corridors of powers about many files cleared by the maharashtra government  but fadnavis remains taint free in public perception. he has also made a name for himself as an administrator who is a  quick decision maker  even though many of his colleagues in the party and the government aren t very appreciative of it.also read  modi and shah have been challenged for the first time   by yediyurappa  of all peopletough task for modi shahmodi had made another experiment in the appointment of these chief ministers. they were all from non dominant communities in their respective states   a non maratha in maharashtra  a non tribal in jharkhand and a non jat in haryana. all three have delivered on this score. fadnavis  who belongs to a minuscule brahmin community in maharashtra  has successfully wooed marathas and non marathas alike. the tenure of khattar  a punjabi khatri  has witnessed non jat polarisation in the bjp s favour. raghubar das  an obc  is the first jharkhand chief minister who would complete five years in office  his regime has also witnessed non tribal consolidation in favour of the bjp. each of these chief ministers has a long list of achievements in governance to boast of.modi and shah could  therefore  afford to go easy about the coming assembly elections  especially after generating so many talking points in the last session of parliament   defanging article      criminalising triple talaq  toughening anti terror laws  and fixing a universal minimum wage. but  as amit shah s jind rally friday indicated  they are preparing to sweat out even more in the coming elections. after all  vajpayee advani s legacy isn t so easy to surpass.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




to understand modi s new kashmir reality  these   liberal myths need to be broken
text size  a  a before searching for a solution to the kashmir problem  we should understand it better. there are deadly perils in jumping in with solutions without first understanding the facts and realities. only quacks   or maybe faith healers   prescribe medication for chronic ailments without arriving at a reasoned diagnosis.there are three sets of solutions today from three categories of these  faith healers . first  in india  the establishment view  which finds wide popular support  is that the only problem in kashmir is pakistan  and the radical islam it exports there along with rifles  rocket launchers and rdx. get the pakistanis off our backs  and you shoot a sequel to kashmir ki kali in dal lake.the pakistani establishment fantasy  again with wide public support  is the exact opposite  get the indians out by pushing  pinching  bleeding them. we defeated soviets and americans in afghanistan. what is india  then  you can integrate all of kashmir as the fifth province of pakistan.the third category in our analysis today is the small but articulate and doughty group of indian liberals. they accept that kashmir s accession to india isn t final  that the will of the kashmiris is paramount and it hasn t yet been sought. to that extent  their basic demands for plebiscite  autonomy  even independence  are legitimate. you can t keep them with india by using state and military power.also read  even if j k crackdown makes liberals cringe  we must support govt fight against insurgencyphilosophically  it is difficult to argue with this  india is a voluntary federation of states  so how can you force people to stay with you if they don t want it  no surprise that this view also finds sympathy among a lot of fundamentally liberal and young elites. i understand the perils in picking an argument with them because this very position gives them the higher moral ground. but we live dangerously.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowlet s break it down to five fundamental pillars on which this current liberal position rests  . india made a commitment to a plebiscite in the united nations security council resolutions of        . why did it violate these the fact is  both india and pakistan made this commitment. both broke it as well. if you read the text of the resolution       however  you will see a three step ladder. the first was pakistan withdrawing all its forces from kashmir and then making  best endeavours  to ensure all others  we will call them jihadis today  leave as well. it never happened.the next two steps were india thinning its troops to the minimum needed  setting up an all party government  and then for a plebiscite to be held under a un appointed governor. pakistan didn t take the first step. india wasn t jumping to take the next two. . most kashmiris want neither india nor pakistan. they want freedom  or azaadi. how can you deny it to them  think referendum  think quebec  scotland  or brexit.once again  read the resolutions. it will take you three minutes. they do not provide independence or azaadi as an option. the choice is india or pakistan.pakistan s supposed support for kashmiri  azaadi  is fraudulent  but it has also had some goebbelsian success with this great deception that pakistanis back freedom for kashmiris. pakistan has built this masterfully over    years  calling the part of kashmir occupied by it  azad kashmir .since pakistanis claim all of kashmir  shouldn t they be calling it their state of jammu and kashmir as well  no. because that will expose their hypocrisy in using azaadi as a cover for territorial capture. google if there are any statements from any pakistani leaders of consequence offering azaadi as an option. i find none. if you buy into that azaadi fantasy  please do. you can t sell it to the rest of india. . can you hold for ever a territory and people by military power the answer is a counter question  can you take away a territory and people from another country through military power  pakistan tried this. twice  in         and      through direct military invasion  and      onwards with proxy war. there was also the little madness of kargil     . these are facts. you need to understand nehru s shift on the un resolutions from mid      onwards. the cold war was then ratcheting up  and kashmir s geography trapped it into a unique pincer where the great game hadn t ended. foreseeing trouble  he moved to integrate kashmir in      with sheikh abdullah s arrest. in the next two years  pakistan had joined the us led baghdad pact  seato etc. it began tilting the military balance in its favour over the next decade. ultimately it was nehru s pre emptive action that saved kashmir from military  not plebiscite led  capture.the pakistanis waited until they felt they had built sufficient military advantage  caught india in a period of weakness   military recovering from the      debacle  nehru s death  food shortages   and used its full us armed and trained military might  read up on op gibraltar and op grand slam  to take kashmir  but failed.this was the last time pakistan could have taken kashmir by direct military force. and it hadn t sent its troops and tanks to win kashmiris azaadi.also read  with kashmir move  modi has ensured map making comes to an end in subcontinentthese three pretty much account for the twists and turns in the kashmir story in its first un to simla epoch            though at a kind of digital pace in fast forward. that brings us to the fourth  . why is the modi government not settling kashmir according to the simla agreement as even imran khan is now saying the answer again  do read the short simla agreement. the literal sense is all india pakistan problems are now bilateral. which means  no un resolutions. the spirit was  both realise that none can take any territory by force. so  rename the cease fire line  cfl  as the line of control  loc  and work on persuading your people to accept it as the border. why this wasn t stated more explicitly is a brilliant subject for some genuine scholar  for a book called  the guilty indians  not just men  of simla .but the spirit was betrayed as soon as the prisoners of war returned. zulfikar ali bhutto began islamising his country  yes  he did  not zia   hosted the organisation of islamic conference summit in lahore  even named its cricket stadium after muammar gaddafi as he launched a fund raiser for his  islamic bomb .the cool breeze of simla lasted only until the bomb was ready. by       pakistan was back in  action   trying to take kashmir with force again  avoiding direct confrontation which it knew it would lose.the simla agreement was indeed violated. only by pakistan. . but the kashmiris don t want to be with you  what can you do again  a counter question  who are the kashmiris  the right nationalists are missing nuance when they say just    districts of the valley can t speak for all of the state. because these represent the state s majority. the liberal argument is more flawed. if the majority view of valley muslims then subsumes the sizeable minorities of the state  what do we do for the view of the rest  about   .  per cent of india  can you have the democratic logic of majority work in one place and not in the other whether you like narendra modi or not  he has now broken the post simla status quo. pakistan s space for sub military manoeuvre is gone. no political party of consequence is questioning the abrogation of article      only the method.there is a new status quo now. pakistan can risk breaking it. there is a problem in kashmir  with anger  alienation  violence  human rights abuses  and it needs addressing. it must begin with accepting that the borders today are the permanent borders of india and pakistan. we shouldn t need bill clinton to come here and tell us that maps of the region can no longer be redrawn with blood. once you accept this reality  you can argue about the future.also read  from afspa to street protests  modi govt needs new thinking in j k with article     gonesubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




from afspa to street protests  modi govt needs new thinking in j k with article     gone
text size  a  a whatever we may think of the merits  the method and the timing of the narendra modi government s move to scrap article      the fact is that the deed has been done. while the constitutionality of the government s actions has been challenged in the supreme court  we should not expect the judiciary to overrule the decision entirely. what ought to be of utmost concern now is  where do we go from here  how do we try to make india   including jammu and kashmir  and ladakh   a better place than it was before   august       if the moment presents us with an opportunity to bring to an end a decades old conflict that has brutalised indian society  what should india do to avail it i will address these questions in this space over the next few weeks. the modi government s action will have broader consequences in the domain of international relations  constitutional rule  and our national self image. today  i want to focus on the most important stakeholders in the whole affair  the kashmiri people. what are the necessary policies that the modi government must adopt to prevent the situation from deteriorating further also read  barbed wires  deserted streets   simmering anger   srinagar laments a broken eid promisecontain violencethe immediate priority  of course  is to ensure that violence   both by the protesters and by the security forces   is contained and limited. it is naive to expect that a move as politically salient as the undoing of article     and the demotion of the state into two union territories will not attract violent political protests. when the media blackout is lifted  we are bound to see more public agitation  from street protests to stone pelting to worse. with no political leadership in kashmir willing to side with new delhi at this point in time  the risk of violence in the immediate term is severe  and will erupt periodically over the next few years.what should be the security response  we should seek to stabilise the political situation in the valley in the short term  which means that the immediate security response must be marginal  not maximal. this means new delhi must lift the communications blockade soon  and allow public protests and demonstrations to resume. the security response must be calibrated to ensure that protesters do not escalate violence  and that the protests do not spread. the jammu and kashmir police force must quickly resume being the security bulwark that it has long been. the damage done to the police force s morale and its public standing must be reversed.in my view  the underlying political problem with respect to kashmir is the bitter affective divide between the kashmiris and the rest of india. realist statesmanship   which even kautilya would recommend   indicates that bridging this affective divide ought to be the modi government s fundamental political goal. you can t apply psychological salve to a population if people only see armed security personnel around them.also read  j k residents not impressed with modi speech  say opening up kashmir will hurt statewe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfive steps  at the earliestso  first and foremost  new delhi must embrace a new thinking  which increases security but reduces the visibility of security personnel. this must be done as early as possible   the longer you wait  the longer you will have to wait. it involves taking a certain amount of risk  but it is necessary if new delhi s promises of a better future for the kashmiri people are to become credible in their eyes.second  the armed forces special powers act  afspa  is another issue where there is an opportunity to make an immediate impact on the kashmiri mind. so far  the debate has been a binary   between the kashmiri people who want it to be lifted and the army that correctly argues it cannot operate without the statute. it is opportune to now adopt a surgical and  smart  afspa  wherein its provisions can be limited in time and space. new delhi has fine political minds that can accommodate both kashmiri demands and the army s necessities. there would be nothing like a change in the afspa to signal new delhi s bona fides  and invite kashmiri political leaders to reciprocate.third  new delhi should send a large number of administrators to both the new union territories. a few hundred civil servants  especially at middle levels  should be assigned to the two uts on a special three year deputation. the importance of improving basic governance   education  health  agriculture  trade and industry   often gets lost in the passionate political discourse on counter insurgency. the erstwhile jammu and kashmir administration suffered from an acute capacity deficit arising from the conflict of decades. new delhi announced development plans worth thousands of crores over the years  but there are not enough capable officials who can even disburse funds properly. as union territories  both jammu   kashmir and ladakh will have access to a wider pool of administrators.fourth  the youth in kashmir and jammu must be offered the right kind of opportunities of employment  growth and social status. instead of another big  top down sarkari plan   which have delivered middling results   the successful bottom up plans to impart skills  improve employability  and boost entrepreneurship launched during syed ata hasnain s tenure at the chinar corps must be revived and scaled up. plans for economic development are less about funds and more about building individual responsibility  showcasing role models and diminishing mistrust.finally  while panchayati and municipal governments are an important element of rebuilding kashmiri politics  it is critical that the restrictions on legitimate political parties be lifted immediately. whether you like them or not  they are part of the solution. in the coming months  they will take strident positions in response to the modi government s actions. this is understandable. however  there is no finality in politics. the bjp should realise that politics is in india s national interest  and the ferment in the immediate term could create greater political space in the years to come.also read  modi says new era has begun in kashmir. just like indira gandhi did almost    years agothe author is the director of the takshashila institution  an independent centre for research and education in public policy. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




crocodile lover  fakir  now a man of wild for bear grylls   modi and the power of makeovers
text size  a  a prime minister and master politician narendra modi is a man whose masks his voters wear with fawning devotion. but modi is also a man who wears many masks himself. he transforms himself into varied roles   a fascinating and dizzying list of rebranding efforts   from crocodile rescuer to street sweeper to pilgrim to drummer to chowkidar. each time he dons a new persona  a new mythology is created for the masses. he is everyman. his latest was as a man of the wild in discovery channel s show man vs wild with bear grylls.telecast monday night  the show had modi learning how to use a spear to protect himself against tigers and cross the river on a dodgy raft  all the while chatting with grylls about his life  politics  the importance of protecting the environment  and  of course  commitment to the country. more entertaining than the  adventure   or lack thereof  was the conversation between the pm and grylls   the former talking in hindi  and the latter nodding his head in complete comprehension.as grylls told modi what a  hero  he was  the pm recited a sanskrit verse to say how india believes the world is one family. right at the end  grylls asked modi if his  underpants were dry   modi replied in hindi saying he would  manage to pull through the day .as natural as he may have wanted to be around nature  the modi that came across is the modi that he mostly is   minutely orchestrated and carefully planned.also read    reasons why pm modi is the perfect choice for bear grylls  discovery show man vs wildearly signseven as we try to grapple with modi s latest avatar  his many personalities from the past present an eclectic  entertaining and even a tad perturbing  but by no means exhaustive  repertoire.once upon a time  when pm modi was  bal  modi  he was a   fearless crocodile lover . according to bal narendra  childhood stories of narendra modi  a comic book  modi is said to have once taken home a baby crocodile much to his mother s dislike. he finally had to take it back to the lake. the book also tells us about modi swimming past the lake full of crocodiles to reach a temple to hoist a flag. stranger than fiction  well  choose your answer.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbal modi then grew up to carve for himself a steep rise in indian politics. after over a decade as gujarat chief minister  modi finally managed to edge out all competition to become the prime minister. and it is then that his many avatars and makeovers became more of a hobby  a perfect blend for his pr driven  histrionic laden  and over the top  all for optics style of politics.also read  environment is the most under reported disaster of narendra modi governmentborn out of victoriesall politicians love to talk  but modi is a sermoniser  who also likes to refer to himself in third person. election rallies are awash with such opportunities but modi needed more. and so  very early on in his tenure in       the prime minister decided to become the nation s preacher   and his monthly radio show  mann ki baat was born. he talks of the importance of water conservation  of the benefits of yoga  the significance of festivals  on why children should keep out water for animals and birds in the heat  and how they should learn new skills in the summer holidays.modi figured out a year before      election that india s school children were in dire need of their prime minister s help with the stress of the board exams   and so he had to be an  exam warrior  too. pat came out his book.several of modi s mann ki baat episodes had him addressing children  as did grand events like the one he held on the first teachers  day after becoming pm. a curated edition of  pariksha pe charcha    an interaction with students  teachers and parents to talk about exam related stress as well as other aspects of student life   was organised earlier this year  where he engaged with students and even displayed his knowledge of the online multiplayer video game  pubg.despite consistently criticising india s first prime minister  jawaharlal nehru  it is evident modi wants to be this generation s  chacha  nehru.also read  modi s fear of narrative is our insurance against his excessesthe sound of musicone day  the pm must have realised he didn t have enough of a musical personality. a drummer then entered the scene. ignoring the pull of a western guitar or the charm of a hindustani sitar  modi picked the drums to mark his public debut as a musician. in september       he played the instrument with japanese ceremonial drummers in tokyo during an official visit.he repeated the performance four years later in rajasthan  this time seeking to regale the audience attending his election rally in dausa.donning the ascetic s rolea slice of nehru here  and a dash of gandhi there. modi launched a massive cleanliness mission   swachh bharat   in the early part of his first term. wielding a broom in his hand to launch the initiative  modi took on the role of a  street cleaner . he did that yet again last year to mark four years of the movement on   october.only modi can wear exorbitant pinstriped monogrammed suit and yet portray himself as a fakir.weeks after the drastic decision to demonetise high value notes in november       when people were still reeling under shock and inconvenience  modi sprung into action and referred to himself as a fakir  ascetic . at a rally in december      following demonetisation   fakir  modi claimed he was being targeted for cracking down against corruption.evidently satisfied with this moniker  modi went on to use it several times. bollywood songwriter prasoon joshi famously asked him where he got his  fakiri  from. then he added another feather to his cap   became a  kaamdaar  one who works   among all the  naamdaars  the entitled . also read  the modi playbook  delay in pm condemning attacks on kashmiris is part of a patternthe politician s pilgrimand then of course came arguably the mother of all avatar   that of a pilgrim who diligently meditates in a solitary cave. this role came with a costume et al. wrapped in a flowing saffron robe  modi spent a night at the kedarnath cave earlier this year  meditating  we are told   just before a crucial round of counting. he wanted to show that he had zenned out of the frenetic     game.the  wild  side of modi seen monday is a mere extension of an already fairly eclectic  multi faceted personality. what remains common among all these  however  is modi the politician. make no mistake  when it comes to this drummer  crocodile lover  exam warrior  and sweeper  nothing is ever apolitical. behind each of these faces  the one constant is a masterful politician  whose unabashed objective in life is to be in power.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




lt gen nanavatty s kashmir roadmap was prophetic. he now calls modi govt move  a bold step 
text size  a  a lieutenant general rustom kaikhusro nanavatty took over as army commander of northern command in      at a time when insurgency and proxy war in jammu and kashmir had begun to show signs of revival following a hiatus of    months of relative inactivity after the kargil conflict. general pervez musharraf was on the prowl again  this time in the garb of a statesman as pakistan s president  looking to get even with india after kargil as he attempted to reignite the covert war. but he came out second best against a resolute indian army. concurrent with his relentless targeting of jihadi and militant leadership in the kashmir valley and adjoining regions of the kishtwar and doda regions  planning for limited offensive operations against the pakistan military  and securing the line of control in defensive operations   nanavatty was also deeply committed to peace in jammu and kashmir.while i am certain that other northern army commanders have suggested a roadmap for conflict resolution  the clarity  constancy  boldness and contemporary relevance of nanavatty s arguments as enunciated in a strategy document titled jammu and kashmir  j k   strategy for conflict resolution        almost seem prophetic    years later. commenting on the narendra modi government s politically risky steps in trying to break the cycle of chaos in kashmir by splitting the state into two union territories and abrogating articles     and   a of the indian constitution that accorded special status to j k  nanavatty  in a telephonic conversation with the author on    august  said   it is a bold step  and needs all the support. on the origins of his j k document  nanavatty said  i started badgering paddy  general padmanabhan  the chief of army staff  towards the end of      that it was high time we put together a strategy document for the resolution of conflict in j k considering that the indian army had had a ringside view of events in their present texture for almost two decades. i told him that i wanted to include all aspects of what i then considered as a whole of government approach. paddy relented saying  go ahead  but be brief and no recrimination or accusations. also read  haven t spoken to family in   days  how is that acceptable  asks kashmiri student  moves scnanavatty and farooq abdullahdespite the distractions of the parliament attack of december      and the ensuing military build up during operation parakram  nanavatty and his team submitted the strategy document to army headquarters  and later sent copies of it to many senior government functionaries like then home minister l.k. advani  home secretary n.n. vohra  and foreign minister jaswant singh. except for jaswant singh  who took time off to discuss the strategy document with nanavatty  there was little interest in other quarters. reflecting on his interactions with then jammu and kashmir chief minister farooq abdullah  nanavatty realised that he was no more than an opportunistic politician who wore his patriotism on his sleeve without being serious about dealing with the core issues.trying his best to simplify issues for farooq abdullah  nanavatty broke down his arguments into three core issues   dealing with pakistan  addressing the aspirations of your own people  and recognising the fact that the rest of jammu and kashmir was being held hostage by the agitating kashmiri muslims. in response  abdullah would retort   general saab pakistan ke saath do thad   literally meaning  two thumps for pakistan . he would then direct nanavatty to discuss the remaining issues with his chief secretary. on abdullah  nanavatty had lamented in a recent conversation with the author we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now i was never able to hold his attention and he was never consistent and always did a flip flop. i used to urge him to initiate an intellectual discussion on kashmir  but he would not listen  nanavatty s assessment was not incorrect because in the decades ahead  whenever the abdullahs were out of power  they would urge the government to engage in talks with the hurriyat and with the government of pakistan over kashmir.also read  crybaby or kashmir saviour  farooq abdullah can t make up his mindnanavatty s strategy for kashmirnanavatty s paper suggests that internal conflict in jammu and kashmir is as much a result of people s alienation  poor governance and lack of development and employment  as it is a by product of pakistan s covert war and support for terrorism. it goes on to highlight the need for a  long term  coherent  comprehensive  all encompassing strategy that is enduring  flexible and clearly delineates tasks between the centre and  the  state.  the aim of the strategy was to restore normalcy in the state and  normalcy  was elucidated as the point where democratic institutions including those responsible for law and order are able to function unimpeded. the essentials of the strategy are direct and unambiguous and comprised nine imperatives  which are reproduced verbatim below persuade  dissuade and if necessary  deter pakistan from pursuing its strategy of covert war and support for terrorism in j k. seek a peaceful resolution of the conflict within the framework of the constitution of india. fulfil the legitimate political and economic aspirations of the state. ensure the sanctity of the line of control  loc  to include the actual ground position line  agpl  and the international border  ib  in j k. suppress and neutralise all terrorist groups. prevent the spread of conflict to the so far  unaffected areas of the ladakh region and jammu division. synergise the functioning of the governments at the centre and the state  and the various instruments of government within the state. improve administration and governance within the state. mould public opinion in support of a peaceful resolution of conflict.addressing a special group appointed by then prime minister atal bihari vajpayee in april       nanavatty forcefully presented his case to them days before he retired pakistan is waging a relentless covert  not proxy  war using a mix of islamic jehadi fighters and subverted indigenous youth  employing tactics of terror  supported  albeit increasingly grudgingly and wearily  by a severely alienated population. it is a complex situation that demands an all encompassing strategy. unfortunately  and disappointingly  the questions being asked and the limited interaction we have had suggests an overriding and continuing preoccupation with security related strategy alone and micromanagement of issues. in the last three years  we have systematically neutralised twice the number of terrorists assessed to be operating within  at any one time. we are na ve if we believe that the solution lies in mere neutralisation of terrorists. conflict resolution demands simultaneous and vigorous implementation of political  social  economic  administrative  psychological and security strategies.highlighting the frustration experienced by every corps and army commander who has served in jammu and kashmir since the early     s  nanavatty urged the special group to reflect on his paper and ended on an ominous note even though the army is not best equipped to dilate on matters political  diplomatic  social and economic  i am compelled to do so with the hope of stimulating an informed debate. if from this debate a blueprint of strategy would emerge  the paper will have served its purpose. any failure to address the issue holistically will condemn security forces to manage the conflict at great cost.even the current modi government would do well to listen to someone like nanavatty.arjun subramaniam is a retired air vice marshal of the iaf and a strategic commentator. views are personal.this article has been updated to reflect two changes.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




under modi rule and economic crisis  media is still free to question   but only congress
text size  a  a there was time under the congress government when the media could truly perform its function as a pillar of democracy. the press was free to expose and question the ruling party. and it often did. under the narendra modi led nda government  the media is also free   but just to attack the congress party.its autonomy is now locked in the same cage as that of the reserve bank of india  the election commission and the central bureau of investigation.if the economic crisis india is facing today were to happen under former pm manmohan singh  the media would have gone after him tooth and nail.but under the modi government  anything can happen. and pass without enough scrutiny. like the abrogation of article     and the passing of the triple talaq bill. and that is why indian democracy is now facing its most uncertain era.also read  few anchors bravely questioned modi s kashmir move   arnab goswami was not one of thema responsible mediait is not as if the spectre of uncertainty is haunting india for the first time. there were periods of inexplicable chaos in the     s and the     s. but  at the time  most systems and institutions were in place and  by and large  had credibility. let me give some examples to illustrate this.for instance  the authority of the reserve bank of india was not questioned. the autonomy of the rbi and its monetary policies were taken for granted  although occasionally there was some criticism. the post of the governor of the rbi was sacrosanct. the high courts and the supreme courts enjoyed respect and considerable anonymity.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe media too had visible freedom. the journalists protested publicly whenever they felt their freedom was being threatened by the state. for instance  in       when the rajiv gandhi government rushed the defamation law through lok sabha  indian newspapers and editors staged massive protests.aside from the dark episode of emergency  there was autonomy. the nationwide railway strike in      the bhagalpur blindings in       the       journalistic coup  of the indian express in the trafficking market were widely reported.even the cement quota scandal during a.r. antulay s chief ministership in         and gujarat cm chimanbhai patel s irregularities were widely reported  without fear. such stories exposed and challenged the government. even the  g spectrum scam or coal scam during the upa regime and massive mobilisation organised by  india against corruption  in      were top stories in tv and print media at the time. the media could trail the state.ram jethmalani to s. gurumurthy to arun shourie   there were lawyers  economists and journalists questioning the state at every step through the media.also read  narendra modi interview no exception. indian media rarely asks pms tough questionsa promotional mediathe media continues to attack the congress even today  when they are not in power  for their past scams and present predicament. but it is the modi government that enjoys unique protection   even promotion   from the media. the very credibility of the media and indian journalism is at stake.today  all institutions seem to be acting on the will of the government   media  the judges  the rbi  the ib  the cbi and the nia  the ec  national statistics bureau  the enforcement directorate and the university grants commission.today  despite the falling rupee  the flight of foreign capital  imminent collapse of the automobile industry  acute discomfort and frustration in the business community and the frightening scale of unemployment  the modi government faces no major flak on economy. these stories get reported  but never become obstacles for the pm. article      triple talaq  ram mandir and uniform civil code are perceived as more serious and urgent.indeed  the impression given by media and other institutions is that though there are some glitches  by and large  everything is normal.also read  the weakening of india s institutions under modi was last seen during indira s timeque sera serathe lok sabha and the rajya sabha passed the maximum number of bills in the very first session after the     elections. the electoral processes in the states  the stock markets  the cricket matches  pm s frequent visits abroad everything is going smoothly and there is nothing to worry. the pm s image is shining even more after the daring that he and amit shah showed in scrapping article    .what will happen in kashmir  once the military command is withdrawn and curfew lifted  what is the future of the congress party  indeed  what is the role of the opposition parties now  what is the fate of the economy  will there be war between india and pakistan  will china support pakistan to the hilt  what will the us do  what about climate change  the decade           appears to be alarmingly uncertain.the intellectuals  academics  journalists  artists  even industrialists are feeling anxious  concerned  even fearful. when john kenneth galbraith wrote the age of uncertainty in the early     s  the world around him was much more stable  compared to today s eerie atmosphere. today  even galbraith would not have been able to predict donald trump or vladimir putin or narendra modi s next move.but he would have said  que sera  sera whatever will be  will be.the future is not ours to see que sera  sera. subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




legislative authoritarianism   that s how modi govt bulldozed article      shashi tharoor
text size  a  a the dust is still flying around on article     and the narendra modi government s actions in jammu and kashmir. during the lok sabha debate on the subject  others spoke of our serious doubts about the constitutionality of the draft bill   jammu and kashmir reorganisation bill        and the resolution abolishing article    . the modi government made its predictable counter arguments. since i am not a lawyer  i decided to leave the debate to the courts and confined myself  in the limited time available  to the dangerous consequences of the government s actions   to tourism  to the economy  to national security and to india s international standing.but it has become clear in the course of the week that the public  which has largely applauded the outcome  has been willfully misled about the process   and that the modi government has successfully elided the entire issue of its own legal sleight of hand to bring about its objectives. by focusing on its goal of ending  one country  two constitutions  two flags   for which it won broad support  the government has danced around its legislative tricks and chicanery in playing fast and loose with the constitution and with the rule of law.also read  what modi didn t say but meant   govt s take over would end islamisation of kashmirbasic facts about article    a few basic facts  article     was conceived as a temporary measure until the constituent assembly of jammu and kashmir was formed  and it was left to the constituent assembly of j k to determine the constitutional relationship between india and the state. it is because the primacy in such matters lies with the people of j k  that article         states that article     can only cease to exist through a presidential order after obtaining the recommendation of the constituent assembly of j k to end the operation of the article.the constituent assembly of j k enacted the constitution of j k  whose article     c  places a bar on the legislative assembly from affecting the constitutional relationship with india  as provided in the constitution of india. so  they accepted article     as the permanent constitutional relationship between the union and the state  an interpretation upheld in successive supreme court judgments.the permission of the people of j k through an elected body is a condition precedent to interfere with its special status under article    . clause   of article     makes it clear that you cannot amend the article without the recommendation of the constituent assembly.also read  article     has put us in a dilemma  should we choose constitution s letter or its spirit we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhow modi govt bypassed legalitiesthe modi government has tried to be clever  by amending article     to indirectly amend article      saying that the constituent assembly shall mean the legislative assembly. what was the purpose of this amendment  because it can then argue that due to the operation of president s rule in the state  the role of the legislative assembly has devolved upon parliament in new delhi   which can give the recommendation instead of the legislative assembly  because the assembly has been dissolved.however  the government has completely ignored the well established position in law that whatever you cannot do directly  you cannot achieve indirectly. you do not have the right to amend article     without obtaining the consent of the people  you cannot indirectly amend it in the absence of their consent.the supreme court has recognised that while something can be formally legal  the substance of it can be a fraud on the constitution. it is entirely possible to argue from this set of facts that this entire exercise is a fraud on the constitution of india and a betrayal of the promise our founders made to the people of j k.there is another important point to be noted here. the modi government also claims that the concurrence of the government of the state of jammu and kashmir has been received. however  jammu and kashmir has been under president s rule for many months now. so  the consent of the state is that of the governor  who is in fact the appointee and representative of the centre. in other words  the centre has taken its own consent to carry out its agenda. the consent of kashmiris is irrelevant to the government.it is well known that president s rule is a temporary mechanism  meant for situations in which there is a breakdown of constitutional machinery and meant to cover exigencies that may arise during the period before fresh elections are held and a new assembly constituted. yet  permanent measures are now being taken under the cover of president s rule   in the absence of a state government and a legislative assembly  new delhi is using its powers to split the state and downgrade it into a union territory. it has completely ignored the letter and spirit of article    which requires the government to consult the state assembly on such matters. again  the claim is that since parliament is  for all practical purposes   the legislature   the legislature is being consulted. but the spirit of article   was clearly intended to involve consultation with the elected legislature of j k  who represent the people of that state. the government might yet be able to persuade the supreme court that they have adhered to the letter of the law  but its action has betrayed the spirit of the constitution.also read  art     killed because hindu jammu  buddhist ladakh   muslim kashmir only benefitted pakistanan ominous movein short  the modi government has changed the basic constitutional relationship of the people of jammu and kashmir to the republic of india without consulting them or their elected representatives. this blithe disregard for article        and article   is a breathtaking betrayal of our democracy and nothing short of legislative authoritarianism.by claiming that the concurrence of the state of jammu and kashmir has been obtained  when it is under president s rule  by translating  state  to mean the governor they themselves have appointed  and by interpreting  legislature  to mean parliament in new delhi rather than the body elected to represent the views of the people of jammu and kashmir  our government has acted in utter contempt of the people of the state and of the value of democratic decency that is meant to animate our political culture. and the general public  in careless disregard of all this  has applauded our  bold  and  decisive  prime minister modi for his actions. the precedent it sets for our democracy is ominous and worrying. let no one say we have not been warned.the author is a member of parliament for thiruvananthapuram and former mos for external affairs and hrd. he served the un as an administrator and peacekeeper for three decades. he studied history at st. stephen s college  delhi university and international relations at tufts university. tharoor has authored    books  both fiction and non fiction  his most recent book is the paradoxical prime minister. follow him on twitter  shashitharoor. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




pakistan doesn t have any bargaining chip to change modi govt s mind on article    
text size  a  a as pakistan launched a series of retaliatory actions against the narendra modi government s move to repeal article     and turn jammu and kashmir into a union territory  it failed to grasp the reality  none of its actions is really going to affect india. pakistan prime minister imran khan should have known that india s move in kashmir  while being a surprise on both domestic and international audiences  was planned and calculated. long before union home minister amit shah made the announcement monday  the modi government would have already taken into account pakistan s possible comebacks.and it couldn t care less.a rattled pakistan kicked off its side of proceedings by summoning indian high commissioner ajay bisaria  its latest position has been to cut  all diplomatic ties  with india. in between  imran khan and his government adopted several measures to provoke a reaction out of the modi government but none bore the intended result. it s easy to see why.also read  with kashmir move  modi has ensured map making comes to an end in subcontinentwhat diplomatic  ties let s begin with pakistan s stock response   of dealing with any uncomfortable scenario at the level of envoys. pakistan foreign minister shah mehmood qureshi said wednesday the imran khan government  after holding a high powered meeting of national security committee  has expelled the indian envoy and recalled its ambassador in new delhi. this is not the first time that pakistan has trained its guns on the envoys.as far as rethinking treaties and agreements are concerned  imran khan should know that these are not government specific and co terminus with the two countries  governments. yet  if islamabad is willing  india should be ready  and rather happy  to withdraw from the indus water treaty  which many believe is an agreement that gives away a major share of the water from three eastern rivers to pakistan  much to india s disadvantage.among other measures  pakistan has once again decided to ban the use of flight path for indian aircraft  which was previously closed after india s strike in balakot and then reopened last month. the ban on air space may hurt india for a while until it gets used to it and is prepared for a long drawn war of nerves on this issue.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  kashmir banega pakistan  a dream sold to brainwash us since childhood now lies in tattersindia s trade with pakistanit would be foolish on the part of islamabad to think that it would be able to hurt india by blocking trade deals.in          india s exports to pakistan was worth rs   .  billion as against rs    billion worth of imports. contrary to popular perception  india s exports to pakistan increased from rs    .  billion in         to rs    .  billion in          as against rs   .  billion worth of imports .former indian high commissioner to pakistan t.c.a. raghavan has said that the two countries have never had trade of a large volume. he described pakistan s efforts now as those  taken  to show their political constituencies that they are dealing with the matter .also read  art     killed because hindu jammu  buddhist ladakh   muslim kashmir only benefitted pakistanthe un anglea lot has been said about the position of the united nations on the kashmir issue. but pakistan has not kept its side of the bargain while calling upon india to do its bid. it repeatedly asserts taking the matter to the un   and now also to the united states after president donald trump s show of interest   but pakistan keeps forgetting that any un resolution on kashmir has to first pass the test of ending state sponsored terrorism originating from its own soil.pakistan can take the indian abrogation of article     to the un security council  announce to observe    august  its independence day  as  solidarity day with brave kashmiris   or continue to mark   february as  kashmir day  on its calendar   it won t make amit shah and narendra modi sit up and take note of its actions. i don t see how it could.the author is former editor of  organiser . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




what modi didn t say but meant   govt s take over would end islamisation of kashmir
text size  a  a after prime minister narendra modi s kashmir coup on   august  those who expected mega pronouncements  economic packages  and a slew of morale boosting measures would have been disappointed by his speech thursday evening. modi offered neither apologies nor compensatory sops to the people of the valley. indeed  he did not even single them out for special treatment.instead  though he dwelled most on jammu   kashmir  mentioning the latter    times  he also paid attention to ladakh. he spoke of  or rather to  the youth of the region promising them equal opportunities with the rest of india.appealing to aspirational kashmiri youthprime minister modi emphasised how article     had been an obstacle not just to the integration of jammu   kashmir with the rest of india  but also to development of the state and fulfillment of the aspirations of its people. the argument that economic and social indicators of j k were already higher than several major indian states  especially in the hindi belt  would not take anything away from modi s appeal. why would kashmiris compare themselves with upites or biharis  their aspirations are much higher.with a favourable investment climate  better educational institutions  and the revival of the tourism industry  it is precisely to such aspirational kashmiri youth that modi would make sense. modi s masterly messaging was both persuasive and plausible  without hyped up promises or blandishments.he also spoke with both affection and familiarity about ladakh  including its fabled and rejuvenating  leh berry  or seabuckthorn. the eco tourist potential of the new ut  one of the most stunningly beautiful parts of the world  though apparently almost barren and beyond the tree line  was not to be overlooked or forgotten either.also read  with kashmir move  modi has ensured map making comes to an end in subcontinentthe statesman modion the other hand  modi did not overplay the pakistan card. its antics in trying to destabilise india or internationalise j k were none of india s concern. what was india s internal matter ought to remain so  he seemed to suggest.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowsimilarly  not once did he speak of the opposition  especially the congress  which stood exposed  shaken  bewildered  and utterly divided over his government s sudden and swift move against article    . let naysayers fend for themselves was his position.but modi  like a statesman  did admit that the drastic change in article     that ended both its special status as well as the statehood of j k was indeed contentious. it had divided public opinion in india despite receiving overwhelming support across the world. he wanted to assure not only the scare mongers but also genuinely concerned citizens of his government s good intentions or nek iraade. most notably  his commitment to the future of democracy  emphasising that j k s ut status would not be permanent and free and fair elections would be conducted in the future.he also emphasised how panchayati raj  in the meanwhile  would be strengthened and supported  with direct injections of cash and resources at the local levels. this is how the big shift would be effected  ending the monopoly of power and pelf of few families who ran the state like a private fiefdom for decades.no to separatism   appeasementwhat the prime minister did not spell out  but those reading between the lines would have guessed  was that the government s take over would also end the islamisation and separatism of the valley. by cutting off the pipelines of largesse from across the border and sidelining valley politicians  modi implied that his government was actually saving j k and its people from pakistani domination and control through its local political brokers.the most important take away from the prime minister s speech was that there would be no more appeasement in the valley but the promise of equal treatment with the rest of india. this did not mean that modi was insensitive to the cultural difference of the muslim dominated valley from the rest of india. he announced that all measures would be taken for a peaceful tidying over of eid during which many kashmiris return home to be with their families.also read  art     killed because hindu jammu  buddhist ladakh   muslim kashmir only benefitted pakistanstraight talk  straight actionmodi s speech also exposed the hypocrisy of those crying that their rights were trampled upon when they themselves denied the rights of several of their own fellow kashmiris  whether these were kashmiri pandits or other residents still disenfranchised. he referred to those who could vote for the lok sabha election but remained without voting rights in state elections despite living in kashmir since the formation of the state.modi s strong  sober as well as becalming message was meant to reassure the nation that the unnecessary hype and threats of violence in the valley would be counteracted by the government s resolve to maintain peace and order. modi  without being dramatic or sentimental  seemed to reiterate the resolve that in addition to sabka saath sabka vikas  his government also wanted to win sabka vishwas  in this case  the trust of the people of kashmir.after decades of lying  hypocrisy and betrayals  kashmiris  jammuits  and ladakhis could now look forward to straight talk  followed by straight action. no wonder  across the troubled territory  every kashmiri and non kashmiri eagerly awaited the pm s address  listened to it with rapt attention  and must have been reasonably reassured by it.the usp of the modi brand   good governance and responsible leadership   was so evident  once again  in thursday s epoch marking speech.also read  article     has put us in a dilemma  should we choose constitution s letter or its spirit the author is a professor and director at the indian institute of advanced study  shimla. his views are personal. his twitter handle is  makrandparanspe.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




with kashmir move  modi has ensured map making comes to an end in subcontinent
text size  a  a two years ago  kashmir was on prime minister narendra modi s mind as he spoke from the ramparts of the red fort. na gaali se  na goli se  kashmir ki samasya suljhegi galey lagaane se. the kashmir problem will not be solved either by hurling abuses or by killing people  but by embracing kashmiris  he had said.what changed this week was modi s huge may mandate that enabled him to push the abrogation of article     in parliament like a knife through hot butter. what changed was the complete collapse of a disunited opposition  shamefully willing to be divided and ruled by the bjp.congress leader ghulam nabi azad put up a valiant fight in the rajya sabha in an attempt to tell modi that he should go slowly into the kashmir den  but azad s party clearly has far graver problems to deal with  including a crisis of leadership where no one seems interested in the top job.also read  by scrapping article      modi is going for a failed european model of nation buildingcomplete erasure of nehruthursday evening  pm modi offered a full explanation of monday morning s political earthquake. he shied away from nothing. from syama prasad mookerjee to b.r. ambedkar to sardar patel to atal bihari vajpayee  said modi in his speech  every leader s dream has come true. of course  he left out jawaharlal nehru.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmodi is nothing if not a political animal. the taking back  the abrogation  the finishing off  the stamping out  the deletion of article     from the annals of history  belongs to him alone   the erasure of nehru is now complete.india s most eloquent leader can only be shown up to be a bumbling figure paralysed by his own eloquence. the man of action was the sardar   and modi his prot g .equally interesting this week has been the sharing of the pm s limelight by home minister amit shah. for the first time  shah got much more airtime than modi or any other leader in the kashmir debate as he rammed the house resolution through both houses of parliament. this week  a new star was born in the bjp  standing shoulder to shoulder with the prime minister.also read  no  modi s kashmir policy isn t new. he s only continuing what nehru started in the     svajpayee s way is not the modi waycertainly  the element of surprise was as complete as the kargil invasion    years ago  when pakistani soldiers dressed up in shalwar kameez lay in wait to slice off jammu and kashmir from the rest of india. in a sense  modi has completed what vajpayee began  which was to ensure that the last pakistani soldier return across the line of control where he came from  before a conversation could be started with pakistan.modi is younger  and tougher. he doesn t brook conversations  especially not with pakistan. even with his own people  like those in jammu and kashmir  modi believes he knows best. that was not vajpayee s way  but it is modi s.the only way  then  to abrogate article     was to have president s rule in place so that no noisy assembly in which the bjp was not in a majority could say a big  no  to the proceedings. chaotic democracies must be shaped into an instrument of control   this has been modi s experience in gujarat and he has successfully applied it in delhi for the last five years.still  the deed is done. the world is reacting carefully  so far. apart from china  which told india not to change the status quo unilaterally  no one has said anything   britain s silence is especially interesting  given its historical role in dividing and ruling india  especially during partition.as for china  it s a fine one to talk  given its own  strike hard  policies in tibet and xinjiang province  where demographies have been changed to curb restive indigenous populations.if you listened to pm modi s address to the nation thursday  you will find something similar. there are olive branches for all constituencies   women  safai karamcharis  scheduled tribes  etc   but what is notable is the appeal to j k police  naturally  because it is the one largely maintaining peace and will be instrumental in holding it in the days and months ahead.also read  kashmir banega pakistan  a dream sold to brainwash us since childhood now lies in tattersan end to map makingthe demolition of article       the culmination of rss thought since        is the thin edge of the wedge that will be used to change the demography of the state  over a period of time. with non kashmiris now allowed to buy land  a beginning has been made this week.this is also why india is ignoring chinese criticism. president xi jinping is expected in delhi and varanasi this october  and modi certainly doesn t want to wreck that trip by responding to beijing s catcall. so  modi will treat it with the contempt it deserves. one strongman looking into the eyes of another is what india china relations will be made up of.as for pakistan  it may be time to recall former external affairs minister jaswant singh s memorable words after the end of the kargil conflict  map making in the subcontinent must come to an end.what modi has done this week is to consolidate that statement. india will not venture beyond the line of control to take territory  like the pakistanis have done time and again  but it will defend its own  no matter the price.also read  modi reaches out to youth  women   govt employees of j k  ladakh with promise of jobs  benefitssequel to toba tek singhthis week  pakistan prime minister imran khan and his much vaunted generals  army chief general qamar javed bajwa and isi head general faiz hameed have reacted to modi s decision on kashmir with the frustration of a favourite toy being taken away   closing down airspace  banning hindi films and leaving in the lurch     passengers thursday afternoon on the samjhauta express at the border town of wagah.this was pure saadat hasan manto. watching the absurdity of poor people from divided families flailing around for help in wagah until indian railways sent a rake to collect the indians among the crowd  was like watching a sequel to  toba tek singh   manto s most famous short story.as for modi  he has offered a truce in the promise of a normal eid monday to the people of jammu   kashmir. this weekend  that constitutes the next    hours  will be crucial.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




fridays in parliament are graveyard of ideas even under modi govt
text size  a  a the speed with which the bjp government under prime minister narendra modi has passed bills   from laws on triple talaq and the reorganisation of jammu   kashmir to amendments in uapa and rti act   makes it look like it is only the government that brings legislations into india s rulebook. but that s not true. there is also a graveyard of ideas in parliament called the friday syndrome. this is when private member bills come but they don t get enough weight and time.all members of parliament are lawmakers  and the ones who are not ministers  referred to as private members  can also introduce bills in parliament.mps can decide issues that require legislative intervention and introduce what is called a private member bill  pmb  to address them. these bills are introduced on a friday  when parliament is in session  and discussed during the last two and a half hours of the day. this makes fridays one of the most important and interesting days in india s parliamentary calendar.also read  in a rush to pass bills    th lok sabha is not scrutinising future laws enoughnon minister mp s powerjust like any government bill  a private member bill also becomes law if it is passed by both houses of parliament. during the first lok sabha term            seven bills brought by private members became laws. one of them was the proceedings of legislatures  protection of publication  bill        introduced by then rae bareli mp feroze gandhi. the bill  which became law in       sought immunity from civil and criminal lawsuits for anyone publishing a true account of parliamentary proceedings. feroze gandhi was managing director of daily newspapers national herald and navjivan at the time.the idea behind the creation of pmbs was to use the experience of members who were not ministers in identifying gaps in the legal system and suggest solutions for them. the idea worked well during the initial years. parliament supported the members and the committees examined the bills and gave extensive feedback. the government too was more accepting of the mps in their role as individual lawmakers.even when a bill got rejected  its central idea was incorporated later in the government s own bill. for example  atal bihari vajpayee  as an mp in rajya sabha            had proposed a pmb seeking a ban on donations to political parties by private companies. his bill was rejected but in       the government enacted a law putting restrictions on monetary contributions by private companies to political parties. during the first    years of our country s parliament     pmbs became laws   the last one being in     .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  not just modi s museum for pms  indian mps need archives and oral histories tooright causes find supportthereafter  indian politics became more fractured and governments became resistant to accepting ideas and solutions proposed by individual mps. but the hardening stance of successive governments did not discourage the mps from working on private bills. they kept drafting and introducing pmbs to draw the attention of the government to critical issues or to suggest new ideas. at     rajesh pilot  in his first term in the  th lok sabha            introduced a bill  which proposed that mps declare their assets and liabilities. the bill received widespread support from other mps  some of whom  madhu dandavate and h.m. bahuguna  shared their experience of making such declarations. the government agreed with the spirit of the bill  but requested rajesh pilot to withdraw it. protests erupted in the lok sabha when he tried to do so. mps demanded that votes be counted before the bill could be withdrawn. the bill was finally withdrawn after    mps voted in favour of the withdrawal and    opposed the move. it is a different matter that parliament finally had to make a law in      following a judgment by the supreme court.a trend has evolved over the last four decades. after holding a discussion on a private bill  the government requests the mp piloting the bill to withdraw it. so far  the governments have always been successful in their attempts. but sometimes  mps press on in an attempt to see the bill through. since       only one mp has been successful in getting his pmb passed in parliament. in       dravida munnetra kazhagam  dmk  s rajya sabha mp tiruchi siva was able to build consensus around his rights of transgender persons bill to get it passed by a unanimous voice vote.also read  modi government is making laws  not the lawmakers in parliamentsteady decline of pmbsover the years  the parliamentary mechanism of pmbs has seen a slow and steady decline. in the last lok sabha  approximately     pmbs were introduced and not even   per cent of these bills were discussed in the house. there are three broad factors that have led to this decline. first  the government s adversarial stance towards mps has hardened over time. for example  over the last decade  many mps have suggested ideas for strengthening the working of parliament   the latest being rajya sabha mp naresh gujaral. his pmb proposed measures like a minimum number of sitting days for parliament  special sessions in addition to the three sessions  and making up for lost time due to disruptions. while there was widespread support for the bill  it was not acceptable to the modi government and the bill was rejected in the first week of this session.but the government is not the only one to be blamed for this decline. mps themselves are not very serious about pmbs. it reflects not only in the poor quality of drafting of their bills but also in their absence on fridays when these bills come up for discussion. attendance in the second half of friday is sparse as many mps use the weekend break to visit their constituencies. for example  the second friday of this session was on the   th of june. on this day  pmbs were not listed but the house was discussing a private member resolution about water and fodder scarcity in the bundelkhand region of uttar pradesh. during the discussion on this important issue  there were less than    mps  the minimum number required for conducting the business  in the lok sabha. the absence of mps led to the abrupt end to the discussion.also read   memsahib  mahua moitra is bringing what indian parliament never had  a call out culturedisinterested mps  not enough timethe disinterest of mps is a combination of the attitude of the government and the lack of attention to pmbs by parliament. the rules of parliament allocate two and a half hours every alternate friday in a session to discuss pmbs. this duration has not changed since the     s. with an average parliament session lasting four to five weeks  there are only five hours available to discuss pmbs in one session. this leads to pmbs piling up and not being discussed on the floor of the house.our parliament is supposed to be a market place for ideas. in a mature parliamentary system  all ideas should get debated and decided upon. while the legislative ideas piloted by the government get discussed  the ideas of mps get accumulated and remain ignored. every friday in our parliament s calendar becomes a graveyard for ideas and insights of our public representatives. we are at the beginning of the   th lok sabha. this is an opportune time to find a solution to strengthen the ideas for laws that our parliamentarians will introduce over the next five years.the author is the head of legislative and civic engagement  prs legislative research. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




no  modi s kashmir policy isn t new. he s only continuing what nehru started in the     s
text size  a  a   today  constitutionally  legally and morally  kashmir  has  become an integral part of india   declared kashmir s prime minister bakshi ghulam mohammad in april      while speaking at a rally in bombay. india was just about to promulgate the first presidential order under article      giving the centre wide range of powers in jammu and kashmir. the mood was celebratory and newspapers published bold headlines touting kashmir s  integration  into india. entry of indian citizens into kashmir was relaxed generating talk of boost in tourism and development of kashmir s economy.this week  the bjp government under pm narendra modi promulgated the last presidential order under article      abrogating the article itself. the state of jammu and kashmir has been split into two union territories. once again  the country is celebrating kashmir s  integration  into india and promises of kashmir s economic development abound.the similarity between these two events     years apart  is no coincidence.also read  savarkar wanted one god  one nation  one goal. modi has fulfilled his dream with kashmir moveintegrating kashmir for over six decadesmodi government has taken the line that its jammu and kashmir reorganisation bill       has somehow undone  a historic wrong   presumably committed by jawaharlal nehru and his successors . in fact  there is a through line from nehru s kashmir policy to modi s. the government s steps this week should be seen as culmination of a strategy that previous governments have been employing since the     s. india has been  integrating  kashmir for over six decades  by steadily eroding its autonomy and taking greater direct control of its governance structure. these moves have almost always been justified as attempts to solve the state s intractable problems. yet  after decades of pursuing this strategy  it is unclear what has been  solved  so far.now finally  in our quest for that integration  we have embraced the state so tightly that it has split into two territories that are not even states anymore. this is not to say that the current move is business as usual. in fact  its consequences are going to be far reaching for kashmir and india as a whole.it will likely undermine mainstream kashmiri leadership  further alienate kashmiri people  give a new propaganda tool to the militants  and offer diplomatic ammunition to pakistan. moreover  the unprecedented conversion of the state into two union territories is going to put a question mark over india s federalism for decades to come. above all  the nation must now confront the morality of denying the people of the state their democratic voice. surely  a crucial part of  integrating  kashmir must be integrating kashmiris into our democratic system.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowagainst this cost  what can be gained by this move as journalist b.g. verghese once asked   if article     vests the people of kashmir with a certain sense of identity and autonomy within the ambit of federal relations how is india diminished or endangered in any way   in other words  how was the article hurting indian national interest  specifically  after all  there has been practically nothing  special  about kashmir s  special status  for decades.if nothing else  the fact that the modi government could suddenly put the state s former chief ministers under house arrest without any cause  shows how little autonomy the state truly enjoys. as for the oft repeated argument of allowing land ownership for non kashmiris  given the volatility in the state  it is self evident that investors are unlikely to rush in.also read  by scrapping article      modi is going for a failed european model of nation buildingeroding kashmir s autonomy  one presidential order at a timeeven today  when indian history is constantly manipulated  corrupted and turned on its head  the current narrative surrounding article     must stand out as an exceptional instance of nation wide self delusion. the myth is that the article has allowed kashmir to enjoy some sort of extraordinary autonomy for all these years.in fact  new delhi began eroding the state s  special status  almost as soon as it was granted. five years after the article was passed  the first presidential order was issued in      to give more power to the centre in kashmir. this order was only possible because kashmir s previous prime minister sheikh abdullah had been put behind bars the year before  generating enormous discontent in the state. thereafter followed a steady series of presidential orders  each giving more power to new delhi. although technically the centre couldn t promulgate such orders since they needed to be accepted by the state s constituent assembly  which was dissolved in       new delhi found a legal workaround.integration s slow march was always rationalised as an attempt to endear kashmiris to india. it was argued that since the lack of economic development was alienating them  financial integration was necessary  since election malpractices disillusioned them  election commission and other agencies needed to be brought in  since state s maladministration and corruption was disaffecting them  state government needed to be put in greater check by the centre. yet  throughout this process  while new delhi continued to gain greater control of the state  the people of the state kept drifting away.also read  data doesn t support amit shah s claim that article     deprived j k of developmentmeanwhile  from the     s a steady drumbeat calling for a complete abrogation of article     continued in the backdrop. it was endorsed by different politicians at different times  including those from the congress  the jan sangh  the janata party and later the bjp. their aggressive stance betrayed the real reason behind the call for  integration . the process has less to do with winning the trust of kashmiris and more to do with indian identity. at its core  it has been about finishing the nationalist project. it is a completist obsession to see the nation actualised in a very particular way. kashmir s complete absorption could satisfy that hunger within indian nationalism.abrogation of article     was as sentimental and irrational an issue for some in the rest of india as it was for kashmir. they felt that it was only by negating kashmiri identity that indian identity can be realised. for them  the  integration  is not yet complete  and likely never will be.the author is a researcher at the centre for policy research. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




few anchors bravely questioned modi s kashmir move   arnab goswami was not one of them
text size  a  a the tv anchor is seated  languidly  in a shikara as though about to audition for the lead in a remake of kashmir ki kali  the houseboat sways on the gently undulating waves of the dal lake in a picture perfect srinagar scene. in this pose  the anchor welcomes the success of bjp s  mission kashmir  and looks forward to further conquests   ab pok ke baari  reads the headline  news   india .  plan ready hai   promised india tv.here s a  news  india anchor reporting on the news of the day. pathetic. pic.twitter.com fdwerzstle   manisha pande   mnshap  august        not that the anchor had far to look  arnab goswami told us sunday that        additional troops were in kashmir  not to  play at the dal lake  but to  secure the valley from the enemy   sunday debate  republic tv .elsewhere  newsx presented a  special broadcast   which celebrated the jammu   kashmir way of life  something all indians can now enjoy once they settle down there in freshly acquired properties. they can savour  j k cuisine   for instance   in particular rajma  a jammu favourite  also served at weddings   the channel informed us. to integrate with the local population  they can adorn their homes with a copper kettle   every house has one in kashmir . they can visit the  floating post office  too  maybe even join the news   anchor on a little ride down dal lake also read  kashmir calm  claim officials  as only   patients with pellet injuries land in srinagar hospitalon many channels   aaj tak  zee news  india tv  for example   people were shown dancing in the streets of jammu  ladakh and delhi to the beat of firecrackers  while others distributed sweets to commemorate the state s  integration  with india.in srinagar  tv footage showed no jubilation or dismay  just deserted streets with barbed wire fencing  shuttered shops and marketspatrolled by fully armed troops. curfew. tv news crews filmed these empty scenes and said the authorities claimed the situation was  calm .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now all entry and exits sealed  nobody knows what will happen next   said the mirror now reporter. since communication lines had been suspended  everyone still didn t know about the  game changing  moves by the centre  he added.cnn news   reporter anand narasimhan found one civilian on the road and eagerly collared him for a soundbite   he said what we could all see  shutdown  crackdown. kashmirdiaries two eventful days. anxiety  angst  apprehension go hand in hand with joy  jubilation   a sense of justice. got a sense of all sides of j k prism. it s the time to work together on inclusion   integration while preserving identity of j k under the union of india. pic.twitter.com ah yqzggvy   anand narasimhan   anchoranandn  august        the only other local person we heard from was national conference s farooq abdullah. on ndtv       he was in tears  expressing his sense of betrayal at the centre s decision on article    . on times now  he claimed to be under house arrest something the channel pooh pooed immediately   farooq s incredible lies  listen to farooq s absurdities..   it said  pointing out that he had travelled to a hotel four kilometres from his home to speak to the media this after home minister amit shah told parliament no one was detained in kashmir.these examples tell you exactly where news channels stand on the  historic  mission kashmir  as they all called it   solidly behind the government and against the opposition.also read  terrified  worried   restless  kashmiris struggle to connect with families back homemission kashmirthe tv channels had positioned themselves  rather like troops  in defence of the government well in advance. from sunday into monday morning before home minister amit shah s    am rajya sabha announcement  anchors and reporters  like excited schoolchildren  were breathless with promises of  something . they didn t know what  but it was  big .well  even we could deduce that. big decision awaited   said news    learnedly.  something big   agreed aaj tak.  something   confirmed arnab goswami   is going to happen  . the  kashmir clampdown   is  fraught with implications that suggest something big is on the cards   proclaimed rahul shivshankar  rather grandiosely. situation is calm in the valley   claimed zee news   the only panic is amongst politicians  opposition leaders . then began the countdown      minutes to a new dawn   said zee news sunnily      minutes and the picture will be clear   added india tv     .  .    ticked republic bharat s clock.minutes after    am came the expressions of satisfaction   modi s new kashmir   india today    historic  game changing  move   modi integrates kashmir   time now    modi corrects      error   newsx    india celebrates   cnn news   .  congratulations to all of us   said goswami on behalf of all of us.also read  forcing new delhi s will on kashmir will only intensify the grievances of its people the only people opposing   observed india today s shiv aroor   are opposing for the sake of opposing. a few anchors raised questions  particularly about the manner in which the decision was taken   was this the right way to do it   asked faye d souza on mirror now.  why was it done like this  with a valley clampdown  if it is good for the people  such questions were brave and rare.fingers at congress  againpart ii of this drama was equally familiar  as it played out politically and in the media. after different voices in the congress said different things on the government s decisions  and rahul gandhi criticised the move  news channels went for the party again   congress in disarray   india today    congress toeing pak line  times now     congress split wide open   ndtv          rahulbackspakistan   republic tv .this is the anti national virus that afflicts opposition parties each time the government announces a decision then they received daily doses of media criticism and the affliction dies down  until the next attack.clearly  in this case  anyone who criticised the kashmir move will be condemned as an anti national naysayer and discredited. hence  the virulent times now attack on farooq abdullah. hence  arnab goswami s diatribe against jd u  s pawan verma for his party walking away from the vote on the new dispensation   you surprise me  you surprise me .  goswami railed  saying the party was holding on  for dear life   to the coalition with the bjp  in a  parasitic manner    republic tv .lastly  have you watched  naya bharat ka naya uttar pradesh    each evening before the arnab goswami show on republic tv  this promotional film celebrates happy days in the state under the bjp government. and what about unnao and sonbhadra  hakuna matata   as they sing in the lion king   it means no worries     yogi is there.also read  migrant workers scramble to get out of kashmir  say night of clampdown was horrificsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




question hour for modi  why parliament must fix a time for pm to answer questions
text size  a  a for the head of the world s biggest democracy to spend an entire term in the office without holding a single press conference should be a matter of concern. but prime minister narendra modi could do that between      and     . the one place where he could be made to face questions from people s elected representatives   inside parliament   also rarely sees him responding to questions related to the ministries held by him. on most occasions  these questions are answered by the minister of state of the prime minister s office  pmo .can indian parliament then adopt a measure that britain  the mother of the parliamentary system of democracy across the world  adopted in      britain s provision to make pm answerablethe  prime minister s question  was first introduced in the british parliament on    october     . under this provision  members of the house of commons  the british equivalent to india s lok sabha  ask questions directly from the prime minister every wednesday. in the noon  one and a half hour period is reserved where only the prime minister answers questions on the government s works on important issues.any member of the house initiates discussion on the government s conduct of its business. after this  other members ask counter questions based on the prime minister s response. the pm is obligated to respond to their questions one by one. although the pm does have prior information about the issues that might be raised during the discussion  s he remains unaware of the exact question that would be asked. during this session  one member is allowed to ask only one question  but the leader of opposition can ask several questions.also read  lack of opposition in parliament doesn t mean there won t be any opposition to modi govtin modi s contextpm modi often does not face questions on important issues. he is rarely seen answering questions during the question hour   either in the lok sabha or in the rajya sabha. while modi delivers lengthy speeches in parliament  he rarely indulges in cross questioning. on most issues  only the concerned ministers respond to members  queries. pm modi does not even answer the questions related to the ministries held by him. this task is carried out by the minister of states related to the prime minister s office.the founding fathers of the indian constitution chose the parliamentary system over the presidential system because the government formed under this method and its head   the pm   remain responsible towards the representatives elected by the people   the mps. under the bharatiya janata party  bjp  s rule  it has become quite evident that the head of the government  pm modi  evades his responsibility of sharing details about the government s plan with the members of parliament   and with that  the citizens of india.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowindia s connection to british systemthe british parliament started the system of  prime minister s question  to avoid this kind of situation. as india has adopted its parliamentary system from britain  it should also consider some of the important changes or innovations adopted by the british parliament.to understand the need to fix a special time for  prime minister s question  in indian parliament  we need to take a look at the history of the parliamentary system. in the modern world  britain is referred to as the  birthplace of the parliamentary system . this unique system   also termed as westminster system   spread all across the world due to british colonialism. in the middle of the   th century  a large number of nations acquired independence from the british rule. some of them opted for the united states  presidential system of government  but india and several other countries adopted the parliamentary system.both the parliamentary and the presidential systems of governance have their pros and cons. the parliamentary system ensures representation of diverse groups of communities in governance and also makes the government answerable to the representatives elected by the public. on the other hand  while the presidential system ensures stability  it makes one individual   usually the president   too important.on    december       the constituent assembly of india witnessed a detailed discussion on whether to adopt the parliamentary or presidential system of governance. it was finally decided that since common people were already familiar with the parliamentary system  and because this system makes the government answerable to them  india should opt for the parliamentary model.also read  modi government is making laws  not the lawmakers in parliamentchanges in indian parliamentthe biggest change in india s parliamentary system took place in      when the  zero hour  was introduced.  zero hour  is the time that immediately follows the  question hour . members first inform the speaker and then ask questions from the government representatives on pertinent issues.the second big change in the indian parliamentary system came in      when department related standing committees were constituted for the first time. as of now  there are    such committees. out of these     function under the lok sabha speaker s supervision while the remaining eight are attached to the office of rajya sabha chairman. these committees play an important role in the formation of laws related to their departments and also oversee their budgetary allocation etc.the constitution of these committees has a profound impact on indian parliament s style of functioning  which is why they are often referred to as  mini parliament .while india adopted the idea of standing committees from the us  the  zero hour  is its own innovation. in the same spirit  indian parliament can also make britain s  prime minister s question  a part of its system. it s the need of the hour.the author is a phd student of politics at royal holloway  university of london. views are personal.this article has been translated from hindi. read the original here.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




opposing modi govt on triple talaq and article      nitish kumar signals a shift. again
text size  a  a all the political talk is about how home minister amit shah managed to get the support of the opposition parties like the aap  the bsp and the bjd in effectively scrapping article     for jammu and kashmir. but nitish kumar  the bjp s alliance partner and jd u  president  did not support the narendra modi government   either on kashmir or on triple talaq. on both these bills  jd u  mps abstained from voting. this is a far more surprising development because the jd u  and the bjp are partners in bihar government and the state will go to polls next year.so  what could have prompted bihar chief minister nitish kumar to take this stand  there are three possible explanations jd u  is taking a principled position  the janata dal  united  is against the uniform civil code  the abolition of article      and the construction of ram temple at the disputed site in ayodhya. so  its opposition to the muslim women  protection of rights on marriage  bill        and the jammu and kashmir  reorganisation  bill        stems from there. nitish kumar has maintained that although the jd u  has partnered with the bjp  it won t support the party on these three contentious issues.  the bjp s opposition over triple talaq is part of its larger plan to move towards bringing a uniform civil code in india.  in doing so  the jd u  has tried to protect its  political identity  and also insured that it attracts support from a section of muslims. nitish kumar s stand was no different when his samata party had joined hands with the atal bihari vajpayee led bjp in     . his decision now to oppose modi s bjp follows its stance of keeping its socialist culture intact. this is significant because nitish kumar understands the risks involved here   the jd u  could find itself being labelled as anti women  pro muslim or even anti national by bjp supporters. but more importantly  the jd u  has put the bihar government at risk  because it is dependent on the support of bjp mlas.also read  nitish kumar condemns pragya thakur s godse remark  says bjp must consider expelling herjd u  is taking an opportunistic position  nitish kumar is the master of pragmatic  opportunistic politics   and his on off alliance with the bjp sums it up well. after supporting the bjp for    years       to        nitish kumar broke ties with the party in      soon after it announced narendra modi as the party s prime ministerial candidate for      lok sabha election. while commenting on his decision  nitish kumar said in an interview then that  the leader of bjp led nda should not have rough edges.  this was a surprise for the bjp because nitish kumar had decided to stay in the nda government after the      gujarat riots. but his decision to part ways in      did not work out well for the jd u   which won only two of the    seats it contested on in the      election. this humiliating defeat prompted nitish kumar to forge an alliance with long time foe lalu prasad for the      assembly election in bihar. the alliance won handsomely and despite his party winning fewer seats  nitish kumar became the chief minister. two years later  he dumped the rjd and was back in the nda s fold. he continues to be the cm with the bjp s support in bihar. if nitish kumar had left nda in      because of modi  why did he join hands with the bjp four years later  when modi s hold over the party had only increased  why is he still in the nda  nobody can say that modi s rough edges have smoothed since.jd u  is taking a rational position  the jd u  is responding to political realities. most probably  nitish kumar has sensed that an emboldened  post    may bjp will dump the jd u  and go it alone in the upcoming bihar assembly election. it could continue its alliance with smaller parties like the lok janshakti party of ram vilas paswan  but the bjp won t like to be in an alliance where it has to play a junior role   not after having won the kind of mandate it did in      lok sabha election. the bjp has waited for more than three decades to have its own chief minister in bihar   the only northern state the bjp has failed to conquer. it will look to hit at the last forte of secularism in the next assembly election. bihar is important for the bjp also because it has produced a counter narrative to the hegemonic hindutva ideology by putting caste and social justice at the forefront that seemingly strikes at the heart of rss chief mohan bhagwat s samajik samarasta. perhaps nitish kumar  the weatherman  has sensed this. unable to save the alliance  nitish kumar is pre emptively trying to save his political identity.also read  leaderless   desperate  rjd wants to ally with nitish kumar again to help reboot partyin that case  it s prudent for nitish kumar to chart his own ways in terms of ideology and political formations and alliances. for this  he needs strong differentiators. triple talaq bill and the scrapping of article     or reorganisation of jammu and kashmir are perhaps those differentiators. it will help the jd u  in forging an alliance with secular parties while also keeping the possibility of winning muslim votes alive. at this moment we do not know what the rjd  facing an existential crisis  will do. will it align with the jd u  again  will their alliance be able to stop the juggernaut of the bjp in bihar the answers may appear unclear now but nitish kumar s challenge to narendra modi s bjp at its peak is unmistakable.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




savarkar wanted one god  one nation  one goal. modi has fulfilled his dream with kashmir move
text size  a  a in redrawing the borders of india and scrapping the discriminatory article      the narendra modi government has realised a long cherished dream of savarkar  in addition to fulfilling s.p. mookerjee s dying wish.savarkar  mookerjee  atal bihari vajpayee and now narendra modi and amit shah have all been led by their unwavering belief in the unitary nature of indian polity.this idea of a strong  united  akhand bharat  naturally made its way into the modi government s decision to scrap article     that gave special status to jammu and kashmir.the idea has remained consistent right from the time savarkar propounded it in the     s.also read  sardar patel was adamant  give kashmir to pakistan  take hyderabad. nehru saved it  sozone god  one country  one goalafter    years of incarceration in the cellular jail in the andamans  vinayak damodar savarkar was shifted to mainland india to the ratnagiri prison in     . after spending close to three years there  he was finally let off on a conditional release in january     .the reforms that savarkar had ushered in the prisons and his own magnetic personality inspired several fellow political prisoners. when he was being released in       he urged prison inmates to commit themselves to one guiding mantra   one god  one country  one goal  one caste  one life  one language.   my transportation for life  savarkar we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowirrespective of the omissions that one might criticise the indian political right wing for  this foundational idea of savarkar has been the cornerstone of its philosophy.the idea of a united india has been a constant feature in all the manifestos of the jana sangh and the bjp. so  it s no surprise that the bjp has implemented it when it has majority in parliament. the contours of  how  it would be implemented was debated  never the  if .also read  what nehru wrote to sardar patel on kashmir   its  oblivious  hindu maharajasavarkar s national principlein the hindu mahsaabha s   th annual session held at karnavati  ahmedabad  in       savarkar delivered his presidential address. he reiterated that  hindusthan must remain one and indivisible.  the independent india of his dreams was one that was not only  united   but also a  unitarian nation    from kashmir to rameshwaram  from sindh to assam.  hindu rashtra darshan  savarkar in a statement released on    july       savarkar recounted his tour of kashmir and the entreaties that came to him from both the hindu as well as the muslim population of the princely state.savarkar mentioned  with a sense of alarm  the views of mahatma gandhi that if the hindu maharaja of kashmir could not appease and secure the confidence of his muslim citizens  he had no right to rule and should rather go to kashi and perform penance. the same gandhi  wondered savarkar  never admonished the nizam of hyderabad for not securing the confidence of the majority hindu population there  nor did he ask the nizam to relinquish power and proceed to mecca to perform tauba  each time communal decisions of the administration or riots rocked that princely state.the president of the jammu and kashmir conference had called on savarkar and demanded the support of the hindu mahasabha for the muslim majority of kashmir for their doctrine that population strength be the basis of any democracy. in his reply  savarkar emphasised that the principle that bound him and the hindu mahasabha was this  the national principle which forms the political creed of the mahasabha lays it down that all citizens who owe undivided loyalty and allegiance to the indian nation and to the indian state shall be treated with perfect equality and shall share duties and obligations equally in common  irrespective of caste  creed or religion  and the representation also shall either be on the basis of one man one vote or in proportion to the population in case of separate electorates and public services shall go by merit alone. the indispensable criterion according to savarkar in this prescription was that it applied only to those persons who were both indian citizens and owed an undivided loyalty to india.how could these organisations  in kashmir or outside who contribute to the pakistani creed  declare that they want to secede from the indian state and can therefore owe no loyalty to the central indian government  lay claims to any benefits or rights  he questioned. they were  incipient enemies of the indian nation  like any suspected aliens who reside in the country   he argued.  historic statements by savarkar  karnatak printing press according to savarkar  the first duty of a state and a nation is  and ought to be  self preservation and self defence. no self respecting and responsible country in the world could allow that section which openly aims to create  a state within a state   to dominate it.and handing over vitals arms of the state such as military and police to such a secessionist section was little short of suicide  in his view.the doctrine of due representation by population would need to be uniformly applied across india  even in states such as hyderabad or bhopal where the hindus were in a majority and were ruled by a muslim ruler. savarkar called upon the muslim population of kashmir to give up its  airy ambitions of a pakistani federation  or any nefarious plans to annex the hindu state and instead work by building mutual trust and goodwill with the government of india in order to secure the rights they were due.also read  read this before deciding whether savarkar was a british stooge or strategic nationalista warning to nehrualthough muted in his political opinions after independence and in the wake of his trial in the mahatma gandhi assassination case  savarkar reiterated his resolve of the whole of jammu and kashmir being an  integral part of india  in his statement on    june     .this was issued after the mysterious death of his  respected comrade and a friend  syama prasad mookerjee in a jail in kashmir.  may his martyrdom   said savarkar in his eulogy   seal the cause of the inseparable and total integration of the whole of kashmir  with hindusthan republic. ek vidhan  one constitution  ek pradhan  one prime minister   ek nishan  one flag  was the motto for which he fought and laid down his life on the field. let us take up the flag and carry on the fight to success. that alone can be the real monument to commemorate the great leader.   hindu rashtra darshan  savarkar on    december       about three years before his death  savarkar had cautioned the jawaharlal nehru government not to stretch its policy of appeasement with regard to the muslims of kashmir to the point where it becomes dangerous for the whole of india. pakistan will not be pleased even if you give it the whole of kashmir   he warned   they will continue to make further demands raising the slogan  haske liya pakistan  marke lenge hindustan . all political problems  permanent as well as temporary  should be solved by judging what is most beneficial to our country. it is noteworthy that it took more than half a century and an ideological inheritor of the same political philosophy to weld kashmir politically and constitutionally into the indian polity.the economic  social  cultural and more importantly  emotional integration is what is more important and needs to be followed now with utmost caution and care.the author is a senior research fellow at the nehru memorial museum and library and has an upcoming biography    savarkar  echoes from a forgotten past . the information mentioned in this article is part of the author s archival research in india and the uk for his book. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




by scrapping article      modi is going for a failed european model of nation building
text size  a  a eight years ago  i co authored a book  crafting state nations  with two great scholars of comparative politics  professors alfred stepan and juan linz. the book argued that the world needed to learn from the indian model of democratic engagement with deep diversities. the new kashmir doctrine announced by the narendra modi government monday effectively puts paid to that model.the  new india  is saying goodbye to its own unique model of nation building in favour of an outdated and disastrous european model.also read  data doesn t support amit shah s claim that article     deprived j k of developmentthe old nation state modellet me summarise the argument. all over the world  we face a difficult question  how can democracies accommodate deep socio cultural diversity within one state  this issue is faced not just by countries like india that have inherited deep religious  linguistic  ethnic and cultural diversities. the small and hitherto homogenous countries in europe and north america also face this challenge today  thanks to large scale immigration.we have inherited an old wisdom on how to handle diversities. first evolved in europe  this wisdom tells us every state must contain within itself one and not more than one culturally homogenous nation  that every state should be a nation  and that every nation should be a state. this understanding informed the rise of modern nation states in europe. so  the  nation state  model is a political institutional approach that tries to make the political boundaries of the state and the presumed cultural boundaries of the nation match. how do you do that  nation states solved this problem of diversity by privileging one sociocultural identity with the help of soft assimilation  coercion or violence. this is what happened in italy  in france and most infamously in germany. this is why nationalism gets such a bad name in europe.but this is not the only model. there are many successful democratic states in the world today that do not conform to this nation state model. the list would include canada  spain and belgium  though india is a prime example of this new model of nation building.also read  the genesis of kashmir issue or its resolution is not located in article    we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowa new state nation modelthis new model involves a political institutional approach that respects and protects multiple socio cultural identities. instead of stream rolling difference  this approach recognises the legitimate public and even political expression of regional  linguistic  ethnic and cultural diversities. this model focuses on mechanisms to accommodate competing or conflicting claims of different groups  while fostering a  we feeling  for the country as a whole. in our book  we called this new model  state nation .india was a classic state nation model. instead of trying to copy european nations  our freedom struggle recognised and celebrated our diversities. our nationalist leaders insisted that india did not need one language or one culture to be a nation. this gave birth to the clich  of  unity in diversity .the indian constitution duly reflected this understanding of nationhood. multiplicity of religious practices was recognised and protected by incorporating minority rights in the chapter on fundamental rights.linguistic diversity was acknowledged by adopting several official languages rather than one national language. regional and cultural diversity was secured by adopting  asymmetrical  federalism  i.e.  a federal arrangement that recognises special situation of different states and makes unique arrangements to accommodate their specific needs.one of these provisions of a very special arrangement for jammu and kashmir under article     is well known. but we forget that article     makes similar extra ordinary arrangements for nagaland  mizoram and sikkim  besides special provision for disadvantaged communities or regions in assam  arunachal pradesh  manipur  andhra pradesh  gujarat  karnataka and maharashtra. allowing for different kinds of differences lay at the heart of the state nation called india.also read  will modi govt move on kashmir s article     stand the scrutiny of supreme court a union s territoryall this changed monday. or rather  the kashmir doctrine unveiled monday put an official seal on what was coming in bits and pieces for long. the modi government has made no secret of its desire for simultaneous elections to parliament and state assemblies under  one nation one election .we have had a proposal to extend the national register of citizens  a special solution to a peculiar problem in assam  to the rest of the country. this might be called  one nation  one citizenship . reforms in agricultural markets are called  one nation  one market . so  it is not a coincidence that the new kashmir policy is framed as  one nation  one constitution . let there be no confusion about it  what we have witnessed monday is not just a radical shift in the kashmir policy  we are witnessing a fundamental reorientation of the way we handle diversities. the entire country is now the union s territory.this is the heart of what is wrong with what the modi government seeks to do in kashmir. the problem is not just that it violates the letter of the constitution. as many lawyers have pointed out  article        clearly mandates that the president can modify article     only on recommendation by the constituent assembly of j k  which ceased to exist in      .article   says that the boundaries of a state can be changed only after referring the matter to the state assembly. in this instance  the central government has acted on its own recommendation. in doing so  it has also violated the basic spirit of the constitution. the underlying idea is that you do not determine the fate of the people without their representatives getting a chance to discuss it.also read  after article      modi s first test in kashmir will begin once curfew is liftedunity in singularityin the case of jammu and kashmir  this was a sacred covenant  the special status of the state will not be changed without the express consent of their elected representatives. doing so at a moment when the state assembly stands dissolved  when the political leaders are in detention and when the entire state is under information blackout  is a betrayal of constitutionalism.above all  it amounts to abandoning the state nation model of living with deep diversities.religious diversity is a problem  minorities need to be put in their place. any assertion of regional diversity is potentially secessionist  it needs to be crushed. ideological dissent is a no no  it needs to be shut up. we have turned our back to at least one century of audacity to think that india need not replicate european templates.just when india has acquired the economic clout to command a seat at the global centre stage  its leaders meekly surrender to a failed european model of how to build a nation. the good old  unity in diversity  is replaced by  unity in singularity . the  new india  looks like a faded copy of a very old europe. the trouble  of course  is that by the time we have managed to copy the sahebs  they have moved on. and that  as ashis nandy would remind you  is the ultimate tragedy of the colonised mind.the author is the national president of swaraj india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




sushma swaraj   the last of the advani vajpayee titans in modi shah s aggressive new india
text size  a  a i remember it like it was yesterday. adjourning to sushma swaraj s hotel room in the evening  after a full day of travelling about in uttar pradesh in her helicopter   from ghazipur to phulpur to allahabad to lucknow. freshly bathed  changed into a salwar kameez  digging into dahi bhalla from a local chaat house  she was still full of beans  not exhausted by having given five speeches of    minutes each  met countless people  blessed several candidates  and hugged many women.it was     . her party was very different then. so was politics. meeting bharatiya janata party  bjp  leaders  especially affable ones like sushma swaraj  always meant digging into some sort of delicacies. it was the l.k. advani a.b. vajpayee school of politics. even if you were meeting your critics  it would be over a cup of hot tea and some snacks and in the case of murli manohar joshi  the best breakfast table in the city.with swaraj  the hospitality had an added maternal touch. her habit of holding hands when she met you  swinging them as she walked like a happy little girl. her shy smile  always in evidence even in trying times. her coordinated wardrobe  the same colour for specific days of the week  her no nonsense style of sleeveless jackets over matching sarees  with pockets to avoid the fussy handbag. her remarkable ability to remember names and faces even if she was meeting you after years.also read  sushma swaraj  bjp leader and former external affairs minister  passes away at   the bharatiya narisushma swaraj rose to prominence when she was part of the team of lawyers fighting george fernandes  baroda dynamite case during the emergency. she met her future husband  swaraj kaushal  during this time.always marked out for greatness  she became a cabinet minister in the haryana government in      at the age of     the youngest ever in the state. after serving in the union cabinet  like many women before and after her  she was given the impossible task of winning the delhi election in     . in management parlance  such a situation is known as the glass cliff the phenomenon of women being likelier than men to achieve leadership roles during periods of crisis or downturn  when the chance of failure is highest. marissa mayer and theresa may  anyone as india today noted then  swaraj was happily ensconced as union minister for both communications and information and broadcasting when she was virtually coerced into heading a rescue operation for the delhi bjp and becoming chief minister in the run up to the elections. she lost the election to sheila dikshit  another fine politician who passed away recently. she was given an impossible situation again  when she was pitted against sonia gandhi in bellary in the      elections  during which she addressed public meetings in kannada. billed as the big fight between the  bharatiya nari  and the  videshi bahu   swaraj would call it  a battle for indian self respect .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowshe lost  but it would not be the last time she crossed swords with the former congress president  the last most famously in       when the united progressive alliance won the lok sabha elections and the congress loyalists urged sonia gandhi to take up the prime ministership. swaraj threatened to shave her head and wear white if sonia gandhi became the prime minister.also read  sushma swaraj of       a pale shadow of the once firebrand leadera hands on ministerwhenever she was in government  sushma swaraj left an impact. in her first term as union information and broadcasting minister in       she gave bollywood  industry status . in her second avatar  she even hosted a bollywood night in association with the confederation of indian industry at the glitzy cannes film festival. in       even harvey weinstein came to one such sarkari party  but when the bjp led government lost the      elections  india s appearances at cannes became the preserve of l oreal and chopard.as union health minister  she announced six new aiims  and as union minister for external affairs  she was possibly the most hands on minister in its history in terms of social media usage  intervening in cases of lost passports and cheekily promising help from the indian embassy  even if you re stuck on mars . she clearly had no role in policy though  which became the preserve of prime minister narendra modi and national security adviser ajit doval.it was increasingly becoming clear that she was out of place in narendra modi and amit shah s aggressive new bjp  which wouldn t spare even someone as senior as her if she didn t toe the party line.also read  jaishankar does a sushma swaraj  reaches out to distressed indians after twitter debutadvani s protege in modi s indiain       when her ministry took action against passport officer vikas mishra  who had allegedly humiliated an interfaith couple in lucknow  sushma swaraj was trolled viciously. she hit back spiritedly  liking two particularly nasty tweets but got little or no sympathy from the party she had worked so hard for. she did  however  get support from unexpected quarters   hyderabad mp asaduddin owaisi accused the bjp of promoting its hate ideology to target its own people.it was a sad end to an illustrious career. once considered a frontrunner for prime minister  advani s protege was left far behind by her one time rival arun jaitley and the former chief minister of gujarat. the decision to formally announce narendra modi s name for pm in      was preceded by hectic negotiations with party seniors such as swaraj and murli manohar joshi in september advani was never reconciled to it but once it was taken  the bjp ceased to be a party of many equals.also read  sushma swaraj was like rahul dravid  always indispensable to bjp   until nowa unique legacywhat will swaraj s legacy be  her closeness to the bellary brothers and lalit modi spoilt her spotless copybook  but her contribution to politics is undeniable. one is her ability as a speaker  a result of her early initiation into public speaking  winning best hindi speaker for three consecutive years at the state level competition held by the haryana language department. the speech she gave in parliament when the vajpayee government fell in    days was a masterclass in oratory  comparing vajpayee to both ram and yudhishthir in having been denied his place as the rightful ruler and referring to the conspirators as manthara and shakuni   agar ek manthara aur ek shakuni ke vajah se itna kuchh huya  toh aaj toh humaare saamne kitni mathara aur kitne shakuni hain  .her other legacy is the possibilities she opened up for women politicians in a male dominated party like the bjp. by carefully walking the line between tradition  she would celebrate traditional festivals such as teej and karva chauth with great gusto  and modernity  given her training as a lawyer   she created a path for independent women professionals in her party. it is a pity that she was never an obvious mentor to them  and had a very ugly twitter spat with nirmala sitharaman  india s first full time woman defence minister and one time protege of jaitley  over the creation of telangana.even when she retired hurt in the      lok sabha elections  after a series of battles with ill health  which saw her getting a kidney transplant  she did so with dignity. in a series of tweets in her last days  she denied rumours of being appointed governor  confirmed rumours that she had left her official residence  and told her followers just about a month ago that talk of her ill health was exaggerated.if only that had been true.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




pm modi  with clarity   courage  has reversed  sub nation  created by nehru  says jaitley
text size  a  a the current session of parliament has been the most productive where historical legislations have been passed. the triple talaq law  strengthening of india s anti terror laws and the decision on article     are all unprecedented. the popular belief that the promise bjp made on article     is an unachievable slogan has been proved wrong. so strong is the public mood in support of the new kashmir policy of the government that several opposition parties had succumbed to the public opinion. for the rajya sabha to approve this decision by a two third majority goes beyond anyone s imagination. i analyse the impact of this decision  history of failed attempts on resolving the j k issue.history of the failed attemptsthe instrument of accession was signed in october      . refugees from west pakistan had migrated to india in millions. pandit nehru s government did not allow them to settle in jammu and kashmir. kashmir  for the last    years  has been the unfinished agenda of pakistan. panditji wrongly assessed the situation. he volunteered a plebiscite and allowed un to discuss the issue. he took a decision trusting sheikh mohd. abdullah to head the state. he then lost trust in sheikh sahab in      and jailed him. the sheikh had converted the state into a personal kingdom. at that time there was no congress party in the state of jammu and kashmir. the congressmen were national conference members. a congress government in the name of national conference was installed. it was headed by bakshi ghulam mohd. the national conference leadership formed a separate group called the plebiscite front. but how would the congress disguised as national conference  win elections  the            and      elections were unquestionably rigged. one officer  abdul khaliq  the collector of both srinagar and doda  was the returning officer and he prevented the nomination of any opponent in the valley. in these three elections  most congressmen were elected unanimously. the people of the kashmir valley lost faith in the central government.this experiment of special status and handover of the state to sheikh sahab and then put congress governments in power was a historic blunder. the history of the past seven decades shows that the journey of this separate status has been towards separatism and not integration. it created a separatist psyche. pakistan was more than enthusiastic in trying to exploit the situation.mrs. indira gandhi then experimented releasing sheikh sahab and his forming a government once again with congress supporting the government from outside. this was in     . within months of taking over  sheikh sahab s tone had changed and mrs. gandhi was clear that she had been let down.after sheikh sahab s demise  the leadership should have gone in the hands of senior national conference leaders such as mirza afzal beg but sheikh sahab wanted to convert kashmir into his family fiefdom. farooq abdullah became the chief minister as sheikh sahab s successor. instead of strengthening the mainstream party  in early       the congress destabilised the government. overnight chief minister was changed through manipulation and jointly with a rebel group of the national conference led by sheikh sahab s son in law gul mohd. shah was made the chief minister. the new chief minister obviously could not control the situation. his subsequent statements clearly establish his sympathies with the separatists. in       shri rajiv gandhi again reversed the policies and jointly contested the election with farooq abdullah s national conference. this election was also rigged. some candidates  whose defeat was manipulated  subsequently turned separatists and even terrorists.by          the situation had gone out of control and the sentiment of separatism alongwith terrorism picked up. kashmiri pundits  who are essential part of kashmiriat  suffered the kind of atrocities which only the nazis had inflicted in the past. the ethnic cleansing took place and the kashmiri pundits had to move out of the valley.with separatism and terrorism picking up  central governments headed by various political parties made three new kinds of efforts. they tried a dialogue with the separatists which turned into a futile exercise. the dialogue with pakistan was attempted by governments to resolve the kashmir problem as a bilateral issue. governments were talking to the creator of the problem in order to find a solution to the problem. after the dialogue experiment failed  many governments at the centre in larger national interest  decided to align with the so called mainstream parties of jammu and kashmir. the two national parties at some stage undertook the experiment of trusting the two regional parties   the pdp and the national conference  installing them in power so that they can  with the help of the regional parties  communicate with the people. n each occasion  this experiment did not work. the regional parties spoke one language in new delhi and another in srinagar. the worst attempt to appease separatists thought was the      decision on surreptitiously slipping article   a into the constitution. it discriminated between two categories of indian citizens and resulted in distancing kashmir from the rest of the country. meanwhile the jamait started a huge campaign to convert the liberal valley from sufism to wahhabism.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe historic blunders of special status under article     and article   a had cost the country both politically and financially. today  when history is being re written  it has given a verdict that dr. syama prasad mookerjee s vision on kashmir was the correct one and panditji s dream solution has proved to be a failure.also read  explained  this is what modi govt has done to scrap article        a in jammu   kashmirprime minister modi s kashmir policyin the last seven decades  different attempts to resolve the issue proved a disaster  prime minister modi decided to follow an alternative approach. a few hundred separatist leaders and armed terrorists were holding state and country to ransom. the nation lost thousands of citizens and security personnel. instead of spending on development  we were spending on security. the present decision makes it clear that just as the rule of law prevails in other parts of the country  it will equally prevail in the kashmir valley. security steps have been strengthened. armed terrorists have been liquidated in large numbers. their number has been reduced substantially. security provided to separatists was withdrawn  the income tax department and the nia discovered the unlawful resources that these separatists and terrorists were getting. between these two categories  only a few hundred people in the last ten months have suffered. but the remaining population of the kashmir valley  after decades  has seen an era of peace. they were now the victims of terrorism since none other than kashmiri muslim lived in the valley. many of them  out of fear  also shifted to the other states.enforcing law and order strictly and not sparing anyone who breached the law and make life safe for lakhs of kashmiris and put pressure through all measures on the handful of separatists and terrorists. the last ten months have not seen any protest. not even in srinagar. the next logical step obviously is to re examine the laws which created a separatist psyche. total integration of the state with the country had to be done.the argument given by the pdp and the national conference leadership that if article     or article   a are diluted  this will lead to kashmir breaking away from india because it is the only conditional link between the country and kashmir. the argument is clearly flawed. the instrument of accession was signed in october      . there were no article     or article   a even mentioned once by anyone. article     came into the constitution in     . in the constitution assembly  the debate lasted less than ten minutes. leaders of the government abstained from the debate and n. gopalaswamy ayyangar tabled the provision with a solemn promise that this is a temporary arrangement. only one other member spoke on the subject. this minority community member did not oppose article    . he demanded that it also be made applicable to the region from which he came. today there is only one nation where every citizen is equal. initially  panditji did not allow even the supreme court and election commission s jurisdiction to extend to jammu and kashmir. little did he realise that he was creating a sub nation. it is only after sheikh sahab was removed and imprisoned that these got jurisdiction over the state of jammu and kashmir. the decision to reverse the situation needed clarity  vision and determination. it also needed political courage. the prime minister has created history through his absolute clarity and determination.the negative impact of article     and article   a on citizens of kashmirany citizen of india could go and settle in kashmir  make investments and create jobs for development. today  there are no industries  hardly any private sector hospital  no credible educational institution set up by the private sector. india s most beautiful state has not had investments from even the hotel chains. consequently  there are no new jobs for the local people  no revenue for the state. this gave rise to frustration in all regions of the state. these constitutional provisions are not cast in stone. they had to be removed  diluted through the due process of law. article   a was not even approved by the parliament or state assembly. it defied article     which lays down the procedure for amending the constitution. it was brought in through back door by an executive notification. it permits discrimination and makes it non justiciable.also read  with special status hollowed out  j k considers article   a last vestige of real autonomythe role of the two regional partiesthe leaders of the two regional parties speak in two voices. their statements in new delhi at times are re assuring. but in srinagar they speak a different language. their stand is influenced by the separatist environment. it is a hard reality that both of them have lost support on the ground. several national parties have allowed themselves to be misguided. an issue of national integration has been translated into an issue of secularism. the two have nothing in common.the level of popular support to this move have compelled several opposition parties to support the move. they have sensed the ground reality and do not want to face the wrath of the people. regrettably  the congress party legacy  which first created the problem and then added to it  fails to see reason. just as rahul gandhi s support to the  tukde tudke  gang at the jnu was at variance with the sentiment of even the congress workers  the same applies to this stand of the government. overwhelming majority of congressmen support this bill. their private and public comments are in this direction but the national party  as a  headless chicken   is further consolidating its alienation from the people of india. the new india has changed. only the congress does not realise this. the congress leadership is determined to succeed in its race to the bottom.also read  how erasing article     became an article of faith for rss and bjpsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




after article      modi s first test in j k will begin once curfew is lifted
text size  a  a the irony is hard to miss. while the nation celebrates the narendra modi government s move to abrogate article     and bring about the  final merger  of jammu and kashmir with the union of india  people of the state are in quarantine imposed by unprecedented deployment of central armed police forces. the state itself has been divided and its status reduced to two union territories of j k and ladakh.the modi government will face its first big test in j k when curfew is lifted and people hit the streets to vent their frustration. the protests will be unprecedented with separatists and mainstream political parties of j k joining hands. the heavy deployment of security forces is anyway unprecedented and  therefore  there is every chance that the situation may spiral out of control.how the government and the security forces handle these protests will determine the future course of events in j k.also read  narendra modi has chosen the bjp s interests in kashmir over the national interestopting for the crude waythe writ of the constitution prevails over the territory  but not necessarily in the hearts and minds of the people. the abrogation of article     is nothing more than an ideological and emotional victory for the bjp government. it is likely to give impetus to the insurgency in kashmir.articles     and   a had outlived their life and deserved to be abrogated. but as a responsible constitutional democracy  we should have done it with finesse and constitutional propriety. we should have secured the willing cooperation of the people rather than pushing it in a crude manner.upholding the kashmiri identitythe merger of j k   the only muslim majority state to willingly merge with india   was a result of the  kashmiri identity  prevailing over the  muslim identity . articles     and   a symbolically upheld the  kashmiri identity  and ensured that the religion of the majority did not occupy centre stage in the state. it was the political failure of successive governments at the centre that led to religious identity becoming the primary motivation for the insurgency in j k since     .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhile political parties in the state and at the centre have always tried to politicise article      people of kashmir have always seen article     as an emotional bond with the rest of india.recall the thunderous applause received by then prime minister vajpayee when he coined the slogan  insaniyat  kashmiriyat and jamhooriyat  as part of his kashmir policy. people of kashmir welcomed prime minister narendra modi when he invoked vajpayee s kashmir vision during the      assembly election campaign.the vajpayee vision for kashmir  once the pride of the bjp  has been flouted with impunity on all three counts   insaniyat  kashmiriyat and jamhooriyat.also read  this is general bajwa s dilemma after modi govt s article     move in kashmira deliberate insultnow with article     set to be abrogated  the  muslim identity  will permanently prevail over the  kashmiri identity  and fuel the insurgency. to reduce one of the largest pre partition princely states of india into a union territory will be seen by the state s majority as a deliberate insult.this will polarise the state s muslim population. in the last decade  insurgency was restricted to the valley. now  i foresee a return of the insurgency in the muslim majority areas in southwest and southeast of the pir panjal range.further  in the last five years  the regional parties in j k have been politically sidelined by the bjp. with article     gone  there is little to distinguish them from the separatist political entities. cadres of both are likely to join forces to emerge as the political face of the revived insurgency.push from pakistanas an  honest broker  in afghanistan  pakistan is back in favour with the us. far from being isolated  as it appeared post balakot  it is now in a pivotal position in the region  enjoying the support of us  china  russia and the oil rich islamic nations. pakistan will seize the opportunity created by the abrogation of article     to upgrade the proxy war.i foresee infiltration of better trained pakistani terrorists and smuggling of arms and ammunition in greater quantities in j k to give a boost to the proxy war. the religious polarisation will also be exploited by pan islamic terrorist organisations  like the al qaeda and the isis.stick to time tested modelgiven the ease with which the bjp led government was able to  scrap  article      backed by an emotionally charged nation  it will be tempted to come down on terrorism with a heavy hand  making no distinction between terrorists and sympathisers  as seen in the recent past.but it would be prudent for the indian army to continue with its time tested people friendly model in kashmir. the armed forces must gear up for the long haul to deal with revived insurgency. the government  instead of riding on military strategy  must begin the political process to win people s trust.also read  modi took kashmir s special status away. he must assure people it won t become a palestinelt gen h s panag pvsm  avsm  r  served in the indian army for    years. he was goc in c northern command and central command. post retirement  he was member of armed forces tribunal. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi has chosen the bjp s interests in kashmir over the national interest
text size  a  a the kashmir problem has been solved by narendra modi and amit shah  and now there will be peace in the beautiful valley  or so the bjp wants us to believe.removing article     will solve  the kashmir problem  according to home minister amit shah. the union territory status is not permanent  he says  the state  minus ladakh  will have a full state status again once  peace returns . peace will return  he is confident  now that the obstacles to peace have been removed.  article     is biggest hurdle to normalcy in the state   he said  as he moved to abrogate article     monday.articles     and   a  disrupted peace  among the people of jammu and kashmir  according to the bjp s state chief. according to niti aayog ceo amitabh kant  j k will now have  peace  progress   prosperity . aditya thackeray  who wants to transform his family enterprise shiv sena into a centre right party  thinks the region has now opened up to the same  ps   peace  progress and prosperity.  aap s arvind kejriwal  desperate to shed his modi basher tag  hopes  this will bring peace and development in the state. also read  modi took kashmir s special status away. he must assure people it won t become a palestineyour land is my landanyone who thinks the clown and dagger dismantling of jammu and kashmir will bring peace to the region is either ill informed or lying.when the lockdown is removed and kashmiris start expressing themselves  we will most likely see them angry about just one thing    a. they have long felt india wants to settle hindus from across the country in their state  thus changing it from a muslim majority to a hindu majority state. like china in tibet and increasingly in xinjiang  east turkistan   demographic transformation has been a key tool with which repressive states have put down rebellious populations.the issue of article   a is in court. the j k state bjp chief said in june that if the supreme court were to uphold   a  the modi government would annul it with a law. turns out  they didn t even wait for the court to decide. article      union territory and the separation of ladakh are going to matter too  but not so much. those things are more symbolic  because article     had been made meaningless long ago. new delhi has been de facto running the state directly since     . it is article   a that s going to cause a lot of resentment.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  this is general bajwa s dilemma after modi govt s article     move in kashmirthey make mayhem and call it peaceif history is any indicator  this resentment will channelise itself into violence. there will be many more angry kashmiri youth fighting for their land  for many more generations. more protests that new delhi will ban with declared and undeclared curfews. the banning of mass protests will lead young kashmiris to pelt stones. the stone pelters will easily be shot at and killed. some will lose lives  some only their eyes. this will make them take up the gun. so  we are in for a new round of cyclical violence in kashmir  and it s possibly going to be much worse than the uprisings we have seen. there will be repercussions  and we might see an upswing in violence   not only in kashmir  but just about anywhere   said a.s. dulat  former r aw chief  an old kashmir hand.an afp photo showed a document in home minister amit shah s hand in parliament monday. among the points in this document was  possibility of violent disobedience in sections of uniformed personnel.  and they say their move will bring peace.anyone who thinks removing   a is going to bring peace will soon have to eat their words. pakistan based jihadis and their masters in rawalpindi must be very happy at the prospect of further tensions in kashmir. they will aid and abet the militancy  send in suicide bombers across the line of control  especially now that their eyes are going to be off afghanistan.the move makes not only kashmir but the entire region unsafe. it will only give a fillip to terrorism. obviously  the bjp and the modi government can also see that. then why have they made this self goal also read  modi s kashmir move is biggest test for indian democracy   and for the silent liberalsagainst national interestwhile rising tensions and terrorism in kashmir may not be in india s national interest  they don t really hurt the bjp. the more the bjp can say  look at these bad muslims   the more it furthers its hindutva agenda. the more spectacular terrorist attacks there are  the more india pakistan skirmishes there will be. that will only enable the bjp to say  ghar mein ghus ke maara    the emotion of retribution always handy to cover up for rising unemployment.in other words  the national interest and the bjp s interests in kashmir don t go together. and the bjp is choosing the bjp s interests over national interest.the national interest in kashmir was to not have discredited mehbooba mufti and her party. the national interest in kashmir was to have held state elections there along with the lok sabha elections in may. the national interest in kashmir was to have carried out a dialogue with the people to make them feel less hostile towards india. the national interest in kashmir is to let them have   a  just as there are restrictions on non state residents buying land in much of the northeast. the national interest in kashmir was to prevent indian citizens there from taking up the gun  but the abolition of   a will make them do just that. the national interest in kashmir is to reduce the number of soldiers who return home in coffins  not increase the suffering of their families in the name of martyrdom.this is a bit like demonetisation. it s going to backfire. intended to destroy the black economy  demonetisation destroyed the white economy even as the black money owners quietly changed all their currency.similarly  instead of bringing peace to kashmir  the abolition of   a will only create more violence and mayhem. perhaps  that is what we want as a nation today.views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




pakistan says  modi devours kashmir  but india s pm played his cards well
text size  a  a the us has been first off the mark on the narendra modi government s move to abolish article     that grants special status jammu and kashmir  saying in an early morning statement tuesday that it was  concerned about reports of detention and  urged  respect for individual rights   even as the un secretary general called for all parties to  exercise restraint .perhaps  other governments will soon issue carefully crafted statements. certainly  many are watching the crisis carefully. pakistan s imran khan has begun to call world leaders   he began with the turkish and malaysian presidents monday   while pakistan army chief general qamar javed bajwa has summoned a corps commanders conference to discuss developments.with the pakistani media leading from the front    modi devours kashmir  was a particularly catchy headline   imran khan insisted that pakistan would continue to seek international attention according to the      un security council resolutions.still  modi s determination to demonstrate the irrelevance of jawaharlal nehru taking kashmir to the un in      is manifest. it will be interesting to see what the pm says when he goes to the un general assembly meetings in new york next month.also read  amit shah tells lok sabha j k also means pok   aksai chin  ready to die for thismodi learns quickmeanwhile  china  russia  the organisation of islamic cooperation and muslim nations have been very quiet. china s xi jinping is coming to india in october and putin s russia has not so long ago memory of chechnya to deal with.in any case  none of these is a democracy. if you have bloody hands  you can t really point an accusing finger at narendra modi.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowlove him or hate him  you have got to hand it to modi. he learns quickly. in fact  he probably took a leaf out of the world s notebook as he travelled relentlessly in his first term   no newspaper  not even the new york times  could stop the rise and rise of a self appointed megalomaniac called trump   and reassured himself that the voter standing in front of the evm was all that mattered.with most of india coloured saffron  punjab  kerala and a small handful of states in the northeast could hardly make a dent in modi s strategy. the near complete irrelevance of the congress and the rest of the opposition  as well as its double speak on article      made it much easier to carry out this  surgical strike  on the people of jammu and kashmir.also read  this is general bajwa s dilemma after modi govt s article     move in kashmirtrump s fall into the pakistani trapincreasingly  it transpires  that fate in the persona of trump  lent a hand. it s unclear when the us president last read a book  especially on india and pakistan  or on kashmir.trump has been so focused on his own agenda on exiting from afghanistan that he laid out the red carpet for pakistan prime minister imran khan s visit to the us two weeks ago. he knew the pakistanis hold the key because of their control over the taliban and other terrorist groups that are occasionally unleashed to create havoc in afghanistan.but when the generals accompanying imran khan   pakistan army chief general qamar javed bajwa and isi chief faiz hameed   demanded their pound of flesh  khan had no option but to fall in line.kashmir. third party mediation. the un resolutions.trump fell into the pakistani trap like many an american politician before. his call for mediation in kashmir was like the sound of music to pakistani ears. much worse for delhi was the trump statement that no less than pm modi had asked him to mediate in kashmir.also read  modi took kashmir s special status away. he must assure people it won t become a palestineusing trump s opportunitydid modi use the opportunity trump gave him to do what the rss has always wanted since syama prasad mookerjee announced in      that  ek desh main do vidhan  do pradhan aur do nishaan nahin chalengey   you cannot have two constitutions  two prime ministers and two flags in one country   certainly  bjp manifestos have always stated that the scrapping of article     is on top of the party s agenda  just like building a temple on the disputed babri masjid ram janmabhoomi land and uniform civil code.even in       when atal bihari vajpayee took india across the nuclear rubicon and the world was apoplectic in response  all it needed for his principal secretary brajesh mishra to do was to point to the bjp manifesto and that particular clause right on top.certainly  modi is no vajpayee  but he will have to watch this space far more carefully. the international community will respond to events inside the kashmir valley and how home minister amit shah deals with them. the ministry of external affairs has issued a proforma statement saying that  this is an internal matter  of india  but if the situation in kashmir deteriorates and modi amit shah don t reach out to apply salve  it won t take time for the world to say critical things about india.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this is general bajwa s dilemma after modi govt s article     move in kashmir
text size  a  a just back from a seemingly successful us trip  the biggest issue for pakistan s army chief  general qamar javed bajwa  is to what degree can he resist not responding to a crisis in kashmir.the narendra modi government has effectively scrapped article      which assures special status to the state.bajwa and his team returned home from the us feeling elated  they managed almost unforeseen tactical gains in the american capital. the military trio that went to the us separately  and not with prime minister imran khan  on a special flight had hoped to start a conversation with the americans.what they got was much more  a    gun salute  and meetings with us president donald trump  secretary of state mike pompeo  retired us general jack keane  and other important people in the american administration. all this was organised courtesy britain and senator lindsey graham  termed by journalist wajid ali syed as a newer version of charlie wilson.sources say that even the imf and world bank officials were asked to meet general bajwa after his meeting at the white house although they had already met prime minister imran khan.also read  imran khan s us visit is for home audience. bajwa s army will do the real talkingstrategic calculationsbesides the fact that the tactical success happened in a space ridden with rising economic tension between delhi and washington  pakistan s military thought it was playing well on american tactical needs   driven by demands of the forthcoming elections to settle the afghanistan issue  washington was ready to engage with pakistan.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowapparently  trump flattered the pakistani general at length. for bajwa and his men  afghanistan proved to be a door opener. there was hope that the relationship could be built upon further by giving the us administration the confidence that pakistan would divert from china to the west and not allow beijing strategic access to gwadar.what s next for pakistantrump did more than making the pakistani visitors happy. responding to a question by a pakistani journalist  the us president showed his inclination to mediate between india and pakistan over the kashmir issue. this was probably interpreted as washington s willingness to put pressure on india to solve the kashmir issue. the military trio was probably so overawed by trump s charm offensive vis   vis general bajwa that they did not think about a situation in which delhi would go on an offensive in kashmir.so  in reality  not only did the  successful  visit not materialise in any cash in the pocket  the pakistani visitors ended up committing abandonment of a major part of the military s strategy   the jihadi proxies. the fact is that there is nothing allocated for pakistan in the current financial year ending june     . the only signal of good faith from the us is the approval of      million worth of military equipment under foreign military sales  fms   which means that pakistan will have to pay the amount itself. but the approval of fms for pakistan s f   s is tantamount to making a cat happy so it follows you around a bit more.it s to tempt general bajwa to take the harder decisions of containing militancy in pakistan and not allowing the chinese the strategic use of gwadar port. both are major decisions for the army leadership.also read  will scrapping article     and splitting the state resolve kashmir problem or worsen it challenge for bajwafor pakistan s army chief  a successful us visit was important for personal reasons   an extension that will be decided by the middle of september. the issue is not the political government but his equals in his own organisation  who are watching intently as to what does he bring to the table.the officer cadre  in general  like the idea of imran khan  which is now intertwined with the image of general bajwa. prime minister imran khan represents that rootless class of punjabi politicians  which is not connected with the baradari  kinship  system to exploit it to its advantage in building a parallel base that could be used to challenge the military. thus  khan will remain tied to the military s page for longer than his predecessors.in the words of a british journalist  it is now easier dealing with the pakistan government because  unlike benazir bhutto and nawaz sharif  imran khan doesn t mind if foreign governments and their representatives speak to bajwa first or don t talk to the prime minister at all. furthermore  khan is wholeheartedly committed to aiding in constructing the image of the military as the only above board institution and drawing attention solely to the wrongdoings of politicians.but when he faces his generals tuesday at the corps commanders conference  would general bajwa be able to claim that he changed the us pakistan relations qualitatively  the bilateral relations have  in fact  become very sharply utilitarian.pakistan is expected to demonstrate  irreversible action  against militancy that is verifiable by  what sources claim  cia and the british mi . it seems that in washington the military trio agreed to an action plan that is  discreet  tangible  and measurable .the kashmir questionhowever  would this agreement work now when india seems to have checkmated pakistan in its tracks  although the excuse being used to repeal article     is that pakistan may have planned another pulwama type attack  the probability of pakistan army s involvement at this stage ought to be questioned. bajwa and his men couldn t afford to make a move before consolidating possible gains from the visit. now  violence and an increase in the political temperature in the kashmir valley are a possibility  which would put pressure on the army chief to respond  both from his own men and the militants.already  there is an observable chatter in the jihadi circle s support base on social media. according to one such supporter   it is time to release hafiz saeed. it is time to see molana masud azhar in action. wait for it the legends are coming .a political change in jammu and kashmir could weaken pakistan army high command s ability to remain resolute in fulfilling its commitment to the us as per the financial action task force  fatf  yardstick.it was just    days ago  after imran khan and general bajwa s return from the us  that sources claimed the para military pakistan rangers arrested a large number of trained militants from south west punjab  which is part of punjab chief minister s constituency. many of the arrests  said sources  were made based on information from hafiz saeed.also read  modi s kashmir move is biggest test for indian democracy   and for the silent liberalsgeneral s catch    momentthere was never a plan to urgently eliminate all militants. a large part of the strategy seems to depend upon cooperation from the leadership of militant groups to remain quiet and not resist arrests. this approach may not work if things go bad in jammu and kashmir.pakistan army cannot be seen supporting proxies  especially now that it has promised donald trump that it will fulfil fatf goals. but then  would bajwa want to be seen as compromising as musharraf was to the americans after       americans are fairly unpopular among the mid and junior ranks of the army.would the men be sympathetic to their chief seemingly abandoning kashmir because washington wanted him to  or left him with little option  this may be the general s catch    moment. the political opposition that the general had locked up and tried to silence through his civilian partner imran khan is already baying for his blood  seeking answers to why an indian action was not foreseen.the question is  does general bajwa have much of a choice at the moment  his first instinct would be to call the americans and seek their intervention  which may not necessarily go in pakistan s favour.islamabad is likely to argue that allowing us to dabble in kashmir would hamper pakistan s ability to deliver in afghanistan. there will be a lot of back channel diplomacy between islamabad and washington  and delhi and washington. trump would certainly like to mediate but would not want to catch his pakistani visitors red handed using jihadi proxies.also  with american intervention  the possibility of turning the loc into an international boundary remains high. the us president s idea of solving an outstanding dispute in south asia may not be different from how he has visualised it in the middle east   fence the issue in a manner that it doesn t disturb the peace and quiet of his main partners. the question then is what would such a solution mean for the pakistan army that was unwilling to make adjustments with india  arguing it would compromise on the solution to kashmir as per the un resolutions pakistan could also go to china  but the fact that in the recent months bajwa was vocal about his preference for the west over china may make the conversation a bit difficult. not to forget that in the past china advised pakistan to integrate gilgit baltistan into its territory  which is part of the larger j k unsettled dispute. the idea was rejected because it would mean pakistan accepting the loc as international boundary. the three major powers   the us  russia  and china   have a consensus on putting an end to militancy in the region. there will be little sympathy for allowing pakistan to re energise the jihadi proxies.domestically  the army chief could tempt himself into adhering to the hawkish voices in the military fraternity  such as the former isi chief  general asad durrani  who believes  as he stated in a social media conversation that the army must  declare a state of emergency and put the country on war footing . there is always the fear that unless the army could find a good strategy to push back india  it may try to embellish its future diplomatic offensive against delhi with oppressive measures at home. none of this would provide immediate relief to kashmiris in the valley.also read  on article      india hasn t violated any international treaty. that s why world won t reactthe author is a research associate at soas  london and author of military inc. she tweets as  iamthedrifter. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




how modi s bjp has become nehru s congress
text size  a  a political scientist and csds founder professor rajni kothari had in the     s described india s political system as  the congress system   formulating the  one party dominance  theory. the jawaharlal nehru led congress defined india s polity then  while the opposition was largely at the fringes.today  the bharatiya janata party  bjp  under narendra modi appears to have taken the indian political system back to the nehru era to create what professor kothari would call  the bjp system .opposition s crucial roleone of the aspects of the one party dominance political system is that it is also a  one leader dominance  system   nehru and later indira gandhi for the congress then and modi for the bjp now. but just as the leader s charisma is significant  the lack of a cohesive  strong opposition too plays a crucial role in creating the  system .until nehru s reign  the opposition  comprising the likes of bharatiya jana sangh  swatantra party  and the communist party of india  had remained largely at the fringes. even after nehru s passing away in       the  congress system  survived  with a mini jolt in the      general election  when the party came to power with a thin majority      seats  and loss in eight states. the congress kept its dominance alive until the next election too.however  it was routed resoundingly in       in the aftermath of the emergency. indira gandhi and sanjay gandhi both lost their seats. many pundits thought that the janata party  which had emerged under the leadership of jayaprakash narayan  would create a parallel network and end the  congress system  as well as the dominance of the nehru gandhi family.also read  lack of opposition in parliament doesn t mean there won t be any opposition to modi govtjana sangh s brief windowbut the janata party itself had a very large number of former congress leaders   morarji desai  jagjivan ram  chandra shekhar  nandini satpathy and many others. in a way  it was a continuation of the  congress system  with a different nameplate. moreover  the janata party continued  by and large  the same pattern of governance.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowif it failed to capitalise on its success and create a parallel system  then it was largely due to internal contradictions and ambitious leaders. the refusal of the jana sangh leaders to delink themselves from the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss  created a rift.the party was accused of creating a parallel power centre with the help of the rss. madhu limaye  the renowned socialist leader intellectual  used to say that the rss will strangulate the janata party and take over the reins.bjp s missed opportunitythe jana sangh  in its new avatar as the bjp  then got a chance to establish its own  one party dominance  under the charismatic leadership of atal bihari vajpayee.some commentators have gone to the extent of calling vajpayee the jana sangh s nehru. but the vajpayee led bjp did not have the majority that the congress under nehru and indira gandhi had  and therefore it could not  dominate  the system. thereafter  the rss began to work towards establishing its political arm with a majority in the seat of power.the presumptive successor to vajpayee  lal krishna advani  failed to rise to the occasion despite his successful ayodhya campaign in the early nineties. after the bjp s failure in      and again in       under the dual leadership of vajpayee and advani  the party  following the cue from the rss  dumped advani. by that time  the rss had identified a new star in the saffron firmament   narendra modi.also read  modi   amit shah s bjp is one economic crisis away from recreating indira gandhi s      falldismantle the old systemin order to even hope to lodge a bjp system  the  congress system  had to be dislodged first. the  regime change  india saw in      began with the so called  india against corruption  movement  launched in early      with social activist anna hazare starting a series of fasts. all opposition parties with the  anti congress  agenda joined hands to dethrone the congress from power. but they could not the  congress system . it s easy to see why.most political parties in india have followed the same  congress system     high command  structure  a dominant leader with the party workers  unbridled loyalty  and rule by dynasts. be it the samajwadi party  shiv sena  the dmk  national conference  the ysr congress party  the rjd   all internalised the similar  familiar patterns of the system they had vouched to overthrow.the movement against corruption with the sole aim to set up the lokpal began with a huge media blitzkrieg. tv channels had only one story for the public for the major part of the year. ramlila maidan and jantar mandar became virtual parliament. most opposition leaders were seen agitating  garnering as much media attention as they could. the manmohan singh government s moment of reckoning had arrived  but it panicked and crumbled under pressure.as allegations of corruption grew  the congress party s power structure began to crack  and with that  the rise of modi began to look inevitable.also read  congress today doesn t need a leader or an election win  it needs an ideologymodi s rss backed  system it is surprising that the  great revolutionary struggle  to make india corruption free by establishing the lokpal fizzled out without offering anything to the public soon as narendra modi took the reign. anna hazare disappeared in the wings after performing his  role . in time  it would become clear that the entire  anti corruption movement  was coordinated and mobilised by the rss and the bjp.mohan bhagwat has publicly stated that the movement was supported by the rss  which had  urged  anna hazare to launch the crusade. anna hazare did not press for the lokpal all through modi s first term. finally  the lokpal was appointed at the fag end of the term  without any brouhaha.in the first term  modi abolished many institutions and conventions that were created under the  congress system    from the planning commission to the non alignment policy. even the role of the standing committees of parliament got marginalised.the modi government in its second term  aided by home minister amit shah  has now begun to dismantle what remains of the  congress system  to create a new  one party one leader  dominance. will it succeed  the way bjp is recruiting almost anyone from the congress and other parties shows it will have in its belly the same  congress system .looking back  one can perhaps say that the bjp today  under the leadership of narendra modi  is going ahead with the project its previous avatar  the janata party  had to abandon in     .karl marx had once observed prophetically   history repeats itself   the first as tragedy  and then as farce.  we are witnessing the farce  but with fierce communal face  which could destroy the system without creating a new one.the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




panic in kashmir helps modi deflect attention from sinking economy  even if fear is real
text size  a  a everybody s calling up everybody else  asking the same question  what on earth is happening in kashmir the speculation is endless. is the government planning to abrogate article   a overnight  thus leading to likely protests and violence in kashmir  is the government planning to abrogate article     overnight  which gives j k state a special status under the indian constitution  is the modi government planning to trifurcate the state overnight  making jammu  kashmir and ladakh three different states  which most people think will further alienate kashmiris and won t be in india s national interest  or  is this to sanitise the state so that modi can shift his independence day address from red fort to lal chowk it s interesting that nobody who s not a modi supporter is willing to believe the given reason  a terror alert. that s because anti modi people don t trust modi s word.that is how deep the polarisation in india today is.also read  pm modi won t hoist tricolour in kashmir  no plan now to scrap article   a  govt saysconsequently  anti modi people are again falling into a national security trap. by monday  the modi government will likely declare victory  claiming to having averted a major terror attack  saving lives of hindu pilgrims.perhaps  the government has an imprecise terror alert of a possible attack on tourists or amarnath pilgrims. if a terrorist strike were to happen  won t modi critics blame the government for an intelligence failure  now that the government is acting on an intelligence input  the critics are still unhappy.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhindu khatre mein hain  hindus are endangered species  and modi and amit shah are the saviours of hindus. what about this doesn t make sense  it s the conspiracy theories   trifurcation of state  abrogation of articles   a and      and delimitation.remember that any constitutional change in j k will need a  majority of not less than two thirds of the members of the house present and voting  in the lok sabha and the rajya sabha  which modi doesn t have. even most allies won t support crazy ideas.the poor communication by the modi government on the situation in kashmir is also likely a deliberate strategy. panic and conspiracy theories will give modi fans a booster shot that modi is about to carry out the hindutva agenda in kashmir. this is how modi government handles the politics of waiting. it raises expectations of its own hindutva constituency only to change the subject. this keeps their emotional state at a permanent high. remember how there were rumours last winter of a ram mandir ordinance  the rumours were allowed to float for days before they were scotched.the panic and alarm in kashmir  with people bracing for a possible security shut down  won t affect the modi government. these are people who support militants and don t vote for the bjp  so why care about them the state s governor  satyapal malik  has already clarified that a change to article   a is not on the cards. yet  the bjp as a party will continue to make noise about it and political parties in j k need to do their own posturing to be seen as holding off new delhi against changing any constitutional provisions regarding j k.another rumour is that kashmir valley is being  sanitised  so that modi may give his    august speech from srinagar rather than red fort. who spreads these rumours  who comes up with them  we know that if there s a rumour  the modi government will do the opposite. rarely do these rumours come true. this government prides itself at surprising and keeping people guessing.keeping a nation on tenterhooks has its advantages for the government. most crucially  it will help deflect our attention from a sinking economy and the modi government s failure to save the day. that does not mean the terror alert is unreal.with pakistan pm imran khan having successfully made us president donald trump offer mediation in kashmir  this is just the right time when militants and their masters in rawalpindi could do with a terror attack in kashmir. what else do you need to make the international community sit up and take notice   internationalising  kashmir is always on their agenda.also read  amarnath yatris completing their    day pilgrimage is a matter of prestige for kashmirviews are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




vg siddhartha case shows modi govt must opt for lighter touch towards citizens
text size  a  a the  suicide note  purportedly sent out by v.g. siddhartha mentions aggravations that have earned him much posthumous sympathy. among the aggravations  almost inevitably  is harassment by tax officials. in response  the income tax department has put out a detailed note  with the assertion that the late  coffee king  had confessed to an unreported income of about rs     crore.however  someone presumably informed on the subject has contended that tax officials acted prematurely in seizing shares held by siddhartha. the full facts will emerge in due course. it is possible that this case  like many others  will testify to the jekyll and hyde worlds in which many of our businessmen  feel they have to  function.the charge of tax harassment has struck a responsive chord in the business community and the broader public. the finance minister is well aware of the issue. in her budget speech  she used picturesque imagery from classical sangam literature to say that if the elephant enters the paddy field  it will trample far more paddy than it can eat. it is also worth recalling what an earlier finance minister  jaswant singh  said in his budget speech    years ago   let us  to start with  readily acknowledge that the essential entrepreneurial character and the creative genius of our citizens is our greatest asset.  later in the speech  he talked of moving  away from a suspicion ridden  harassment generating  coercion inclined regime to a trust based   green channel  system. i do this entirely on the basis of my faith in my countrymen and women. singh stood tall at the time for emphasising that taxpayers must be treated with respect. so  it is worth recalling what he committed to   first  hereafter  stocks found during the course of a search and seizure operation will not be seized under any circumstances. second  no confession shall be obtained during such search and seizure operations. third  no survey operation will be authorized by an officer below the rank of joint commissioner of income tax. finally  books of account impounded during survey will not be retained beyond ten days  without the prior approval of the chief commissioner. businessmen who have been subjected to tax surveys or search and seizure operations will be able to confirm whether these promises have been kept. meanwhile  on the positive side  the use of digital technology has made tax dealings simpler and safer for the average taxpayer. most importantly  it has helped to obviate the need for direct personal contact between the taxpayer and assessing officials  removing much of the harassment and  mostly  petty bribery that had been rampant.in addition  immediately after the new modi government took office  more than two dozen senior tax officials were sent packing   reportedly because of corruption charges. one presumes that sent a powerful message down the line.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  ambitious economic targets could embarrass modi govt if it doesn t show greater purposebut if power tends to corrupt  and absolute power corrupts absolutely  as lord acton famously said   it is notable that there is a fairly consistent pattern to recent tax and other raids  they have tended to focus on those opposed to or critical of the government. meanwhile  the government has been busy getting parliamentary approval for legislation that arms officials in multiple departments with extra powers to prosecute  arrest  sequester  brand as terrorists  and so on   with fewer safeguards  and with greater concentration of power in the hands of the central government  at the expense of states.now  it is possible to make the case for prison terms for traffic offences like speeding. other countries too provide for it  limiting extreme penalties to extreme cases. and the home minister has assured that the government s many new powers will not be misused. but can even the most powerful and best intentioned minister guarantee that in a country where everyone knows that the abuse of power is routine  wouldn t it make more sense  then  to opt for a lighter touch  and the jaswant singh approach particularly after the scandalous sequence of events at unnao  what people have been made conscious of is the need for statutory protections that ordinary citizens can be assured of without having to appeal    times to the police  and institutional safeguards that buttress them  even as they fret about the danger of disproportionate penalties.also read  what ccd founder siddhartha s suicide shows   india can t become    trillion economy this waysubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why modi govt has nothing to fear on foreign currency borrowing
text size  a  a in the past  india has undertaken expensive foreign currency denominated borrowing from nris through resurgent india bonds  india millennium deposit bonds and dollar denominated deposits. this time  the government is proposing to issue a small sovereign bond.the risk is small  considering the size of the borrowing  the inflation targeting monetary policy framework and the fiscal responsibility law. the government and the reserve bank of india need to primarily manage risk through sticking to the fiscal responsibility and budget management act and inflation targeting frameworks.in addition  the government should set up a public debt management agency  pdma   which takes a comprehensive view of the government s debt  its costs  currency denomination  tenor and time of issuance.why foreign currency borrowing is riskythe main difference between a dollar denominated loan  as proposed in the union budget speech  and a rupee denominated loan  is in who holds the risk of rupee depreciation. when an indian borrower takes a loan in dollars  she has to pay back in dollars. if  in the meantime  the value of the dollar versus the rupee changes  the loss or gain accrues to the borrower. in addition to the interest rate  the borrower needs to pay back more if the rupee weakens. the borrower is  exposed  to currency risk. for this reason  borrowing in domestic currency is expected to be safer than borrowing in foreign currency.but risks can be managed. for example  foreign currency borrowing of private borrowers can be made safer by  hedging  one s exposure. it is possible there is a natural hedge. if one is an exporter who earns in dollars  then even when the exporter borrows in dollars  she is not putting her balance sheet at risk. on the other hand  if the borrower is a domestic builder  her earnings are in rupees  and if the rupee depreciates sharply  she may not be able to pay back the loan.another way of hedging currency exposure is to buy derivatives. there may be someone who may be willing to enter into a contract with you  at a price  to supply you dollars at today s exchange rate. the cost for the loan is now the interest rate and the cost of hedging.if the government of india were to borrow from international markets  it will have currency risk. so  for example  if it borrows at   per cent per annum in dollar terms in international markets  and if the rupee weakens by   percent per annum  then in rupee terms  it will pay back   per cent in rupee terms.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  borrowing abroad is bold  but india first needs to produce data that lenders can trustuncertainty over exchange ratesa number of factors play a role in the movement of exchange rates. a purchasing power parity model may forecast that the rupee will depreciate by the difference in the inflation rates for india and the us. the balassa samuelson model may predict that because of faster productivity increases in india  it may appreciate. some may argue that higher imports and slower exports will make the rupee weaken. others may feel that the inflow of foreign investment into india will keep the rupee strong.one possibility is that to get away from the uncertainty  india should do  masala bonds   i.e. borrow in rupees. interest rates for rupee borrowing are higher  at around   per cent. alternatively  we could let foreigners buy more indian government bonds in indian markets. this way  we would know exactly how much we will be paying in rupee terms.three necessary reformsin recent years  india has adopted an inflation targeting monetary policy and the frbm act. the fear of large depreciations is based on the fear that the government and the rbi will not respect these mandates. as a consequence  governments will be profligate and borrow a lot  inflation will be high and the rupee will depreciate.in addition to the other problems that will be created by such policies  foreign borrowing will add more problems of india defaulting on its foreign debt. even though the government is currently saying it will borrow only a very small part of the debt in dollars  the fear is that it will be irresponsible if it  tastes  cheap foreign capital  and over time  it will borrow much more in dollars.these fears are based on confusion in fiscal data  off budget borrowing and missed revenue targets of the government on the one hand  and the belief that the effectiveness of monetary policy in india is limited.three key reforms are necessary. first  the government needs to bring much greater transparency to the budget. two  the rbi needs to improve the transmission of monetary policy. and three  the government needs to set up a professional public debt management agency that manages various aspects of its debt  including how much should be borrowed in foreign currency.if the government borrows in foreign currency  it has to manage risks by allowing the rbi to stick to its mandate of inflation targeting  and by itself sticking to frbm targets  in both letter and spirit. greater trust in the country s data will reduce risk of panic by foreigners or sudden outflows.the pressure of being watched by the world is a good commitment device. a prudent and responsible government can actually gain by having international bond markets as its watch dog.the author is an economist and a professor at the national institute of public finance and policy. views are personal.also read  risks flagged by economists  rbi to review modi govt s foreign bond sale plansubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




here s how india s middle class forces a right wing modi govt to stay economically left
text size  a  a why is it that    years after futile experiments with various brands of socialism  the collapse of communism in the early   s  and our own modest success with market based liberalisation in          india has not seen a political party emerge as a champion of the economic right  this is a question that shekhar gupta asked in a recent video. this merits examination.what we have  instead  is the intriguing paradox where the congress that introduced the liberalisation in         is now reluctant to own and champion reforms. on the other hand  we have the bjp  which projected itself as the true champion of economic reforms at election time  doggedly pursuing the statist welfarism that the socialistic congress was rightly pilloried for. why is the economic right so missing from the indian politics we tend to see this lack of a vocal economic right in indian politics as some sort of a failure of the political parties and the politicians to know and appreciate the right economic policies.in their classic book why nations fail  daron acemoglu et al point out that it is politics that sets the stage for economics and not vice versa. in other words  for the right sort of economic policies to emerge that support growth and development  you must have the right sort of politics. politics in india is dominated by its vocal middle class  which has largely emerged after the independence. this group is the key opinion maker in india s polity. also  this class has little experience of being ruled by a centralised government but expects the government to be an omniscient nanny state that does almost everything for it except making babies.consider what happens when the price of onions  or tomatoes  or sugar  or petrol  or surgical stents shoots up because of scarcity or any other reason. the middle class goes on a virtual war path  clamouring for government intervention to control the price. it allows no wiggle room to market based price signals to reallocate resources in the economy in order to balance supply and demand  and let a new market driven price to emerge. we demand instant solutions  oblivious to their long term implications. politicians are only too happy to oblige since it gives them an opportunity to play god. it empowers them  and the state  at the expense of the market. politicians  not markets  determine the price.at the heart of market based capitalism is the question of who decides on prices  resource allocation in the economy  jobs  output  etc. a market based economy lets demand and supply determine prices  which in turn allocate resources and so on and so forth. impersonal markets make these decisions in a routine manner  with government intervention limited to rare  exceptional cases where the markets fail. the whole philosophy behind market based capitalism is to take away the discretionary power of the government from politicians and bureaucrats and invest it in impersonal markets beyond the control of any one entity. this reduces the opportunity for rent seeking and corruption.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowinstead  the whole thrust of the middle class  fetish for a nanny state compels government intervention in managing prices  empowering the politicians and the state in the process. this serves politicians well. on the one hand  the voters are happy. on the other hand  crony capitalists who thrive on rent seeking in sheltered domestic markets are thrilled too. they are happy to part with handsome contributions to anonymous electoral bonds in return for price setting  directly or through other means such as import barriers  favours in resource allocation  or barriers to entry in business. this creates a win win situation for politicians  crony capitalists  and the vocal middle class  the latter capturing the bulk of the welfarism that a nanny state presides over.also read  missing capital  india s trillions dollar wealth is chained in slums. time to unlock itthe pampered middle classthis pampering of the middle class by a nanny state carries over to tax policies as well.finance minister nirmala sitharaman recently slapped a   .  per cent tax rate on some       of india s richest families  arguing that the super rich can afford to pay higher taxes. these taxes are sought to be levied in order to raise resources for development. in short  the government will take a rupee from the richest and invest it in infrastructural development to promote higher economic growth. but do taxes actually work that way to promote growth  or do they  in fact  lower the aggregate amount of funds available for investment in the economy as shekhar gupta rightly pointed out in the video i referred to earlier  there is solid empirical evidence for the laffer curve that says tax yields rise with increasing tax rates  until they peak off at some point  after which higher tax rates result in falling aggregate tax collection. in short  there is an optimum tax rate beyond which the state shouldn t go. the rate varies but is thought to be in the       per cent range. however  this is an empirical fact. we need to actually go beyond this observed fact to look at what happens when you raise taxes for various levels of income. we do that briefly.when you raise direct taxes for a low income family  you force the family to consume less in order to pay more in tax. such families don t save or invest much. hence  the higher rates of taxes don t affect growth directly  except for the fact that lower consumption will result in lower aggregate demand in the future. a middle class family in india typically saves up to    per cent of its income. an increase in taxes for such a family doesn t affect consumption but lowers the savings rate to create room for more taxes. financial savings  which are fungible with investable capital  are affected more adversely than physical savings  which in india tend to be more attractive. so  increased taxation of the middle class lowers the supply of savings that can be used for investment by entrepreneurs.when it comes to the richest  we almost always forget that it is these people who are also among the most successful entrepreneurs in the population. they invest far more than they consume or save. in fact  their investment in capital assets for the future are orders of magnitude higher than consumption or savings. what happens when you tax them at higher rates  obviously  consumption and savings are unaffected given their income  but their corpus of investible surpluses shrinks. that is not all.as adam smith pointed out  capital surpluses saved for investment in more capital goods are the key engine of future growth. these surpluses form the  core equity  of entrepreneurs that attracts the equity of other savers to form a pool of capital available for investment. it is often referred to as promoters  or founders  equity  which attracts equity capital from other savers several times its value. a reasonable way to understand this is to assume that for every rupee you take away as taxes from this class  you also take away five rupees from gross capital formation in the economy. in short  the government actually lowers future growth and development by taxing this class of people. yet  this self defeating way of taxation remains enormously popular with the gullible middle class.also read  indian elites holding back wealth tied in slums. and here s what modi govt can dowith the economy floundering  even at this late stage  the government should consider scrapping the capital gains tax and the dividend distribution tax. they simply shrink available surpluses with entrepreneurs and savers to invest in future growth.tax the escapeesour indirect taxation of various income brackets also remains enormously sub optimal because of the legacy of socialistic thinking. here too  the pampered middle class gets away scot free with lower taxes in the name of the poor when  in fact  it gets away at the expense of the poor. consider the fact that we don t tax food staples via gst. ostensibly  this is done to help the poor. but in the process  about    per cent of the food consumed by the rich and the middle class also goes untaxed. why should it be so  we can tax all food at a given tax rate  depending on value added  and provide a rebate to the low income groups equal to a sum calculated to offset the tax paid by them via direct benefit transfers so that  net net  they pay no gst on food at all. instead  the tax burden would fall entirely on the middle  and high income groups. my back of the envelope calculations show that the government can raise as much as  .    per cent of the gdp via moderate tax on food from the middle  and high income groups net of the rebates that would be given to low income groups.we must note that the political class and the tycoons have no incentive to pursue such reforms in terms of their power sharing and rent seeking arrangements. both are happy with the status quo as long as the economy chugs along at a modest growth rate without hitting an insurmountable constraint. in          we hit an external constraint when we ran out of dollars on the external front and were forced to reform to avoid bankruptcy. in the present case  the insurmountable constraint is the lack of domestic financial savings to finance expenditure  which soaks them all up via government bonds  leaving nothing for the private sector to use to invest in capital formation. sooner or later  this constraint will have to be addressed through reforms of the kind that the economic right should champion.unfortunately  there is no such political formation in sight.sonali ranade tweets  sonaliranade. sheilja sharma tweets  arguingindian. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




not just modi s museum for pms  indian mps need archives and oral histories too
text size  a  a nearly     members of parliament have passed away in the last fifteen years     of them belonged to india s first lok sabha. that is loss of history  not just human lives. an old african saying goes  when an old person dies  a whole library burns too. members of parliament negotiate  debate and decide on issues that shape our country and are an invaluable part of india s legislative and deliberative history. with each death  indians lose valuable institutional history of parliament and personal memories of their leaders.there is now a pressing need to preserve indian political and parliamentary history. prime minister narendra modi has announced a museum dedicated to all former prime ministers. as per media reports  the deadline to complete the  museum on prime ministers of india  is march     . the concept is similar to the united states  presidential libraries and museums. the bill clinton and george bush libraries  for instance  have recently put together papers  records  photographs  and other historical material related to the two presidents. the lincoln museum in springfield  illinois  uses cutting edge technology to make him accessible to school children  foreign tourists  and scholars alike.the proposed museum on prime ministers of india will capture an important but limited aspect of our parliamentary history.but beyond the prime ministers  what we also need is the personal memories of our mps chronicling key events in our political history  with oral history driven anecdotes and artefacts. indian democracy is vibrant and constantly evolving. but beyond classroom textbooks and speeches of leaders  there is very little about it in a   dimensional  accessible  storytelling space that not only brings it alive but is also instructive and has long term academic value.also read  in his desire to snuff out nehru s legacy  modi to launch his museum of prime ministershow parliament rememberson    august       former lok sabha speaker somnath chatterjee  the first chairman of the parliamentary committee on information technology who had moved the first motion in parliament for the removal of a high court judge  passed away. three days later  on    august  we lost former prime minister atal bihari vajpayee  who had served parliament  both in the lok sabha and the rajya sabha     times.this year saw the demise of several indian political stalwarts. george fernandes  the defence minister during the kargil war who won parliamentary elections nine times  passed away in january. last week  ram chandra paswan and sheila dikshit passed away. paswan was serving his fourth term in the lok sabha  dikshit  besides being the longest serving chief minister of delhi  had been the minister of state for parliamentary affairs in the  th lok sabha       to      . both atal bihari vajpayee and somnath chatterjee were mps during this period  and this was also when parliament had passed the anti defection law  lowered the voting age to    years  overturned the supreme court s judgement in the shah bano case  and enacted a law to protect the rights of consumers. most of these issues come up in parliamentary debates and in public discourse even today and often become reminders of an mp s contribution or work done in his or her political life.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowparliament too remembers their contributions and pays respect to the deceased members in three broad ways.first  parliament adjourns all businesses for the day when a sitting mp dies while the house is in session. the presiding officers  the speaker and the deputy speaker for the lok sabha  and vice president of india for the rajya sabha  read out an obituary statement highlighting the mp s contribution. the symbolic adjournment of the house is not mentioned in the rules of the lok sabha. it is a convention that continues to evolve with time.second  if the person deceased is a former member  besides reading out the obituary  parliament may also commemorate the mp by installing his her statue  bust and portrait on its premises. a    member committee comprising members from both the houses decides on the names of mps whose portraits and busts will be installed in parliament.third  the basements of parliament s library houses the parliamentary museum and archives. it acquires  stores and preserves  precious records  historic documents  photographs and rare objects and articles connected with the origin  growth and functioning of parliament and parliamentary institutions in the country.  the archive also regularly sends out requests to mps to deposit their private correspondence  notes  memoirs  and diaries that contain references to their political career and parliamentary tenure. until       a total of    eminent parliamentarians and freedom fighters have deposited their diaries and private correspondence with the archive. the archive has        digitised photographs of mps from the first to the   th lok sabha. parliament also maintains a comprehensive digitised record of all its debates since     .also read  the art of ruining a world class exhibition  brought to you by the national museumpreserving today  for tomorrowour parliament currently captures the deliberations of its formal proceedings and correspondence of mps. however  more needs to be done. the idea should also be to capture the personal accounts of mps to note down how key events unfolded during their parliamentary tenure.for example  what was the mood in the lok sabha when atal bihari vajpayee lost the confidence motion by one vote in       or the discussions in the central hall when the indo us nuclear deal came up for debate during the first term of manmohan singh. it would also be instructive to understand from mps the negotiations that took place between the treasury and opposition to build consensus on key legislations like the right to education  land acquisition  gst  and insolvency and bankruptcy laws. some of these might come about to be captured in a personal memoir of a parliamentarian  but then not all parliamentarians write a memoir.the us congress and the british parliament have tried to address this by instituting mechanisms for capturing the oral history of their institutions. in the united states  for instance  the center for legislative archives conducts oral interviews with former legislators and staff to  add to our understanding of patterns and traditions in congress and to our familiarity with congressional heroes  triumphs  and failures.  the oral history project  supported by britain s parliament  is creating a sound archive of british politics since     . so far  the project has interviewed     former british mps.similar attempts need to be done in india too. such an exercise will provide valuable insights into the thinking of our mps beyond the written text of parliamentary debates. it will help us understand how certain conventions came about and how thinking on issues evolved over the last six decades or so. these insights into how our parliamentarians carried out their businesses and what went on when critical decisions were being taken will be useful for researchers in putting together a more complete picture of the working of our parliament. it will be central to preserving the history of india s highest law making institution.the author is the head of legislative and civic engagement  prs legislative research. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




  reasons why pm modi is the perfect choice for bear grylls  discovery show man vs wild
text size  a  a the news that prime minister narendra modi would appear on a special episode of bear grylls  show  man vs wild  on discovery channel took the internet by storm monday.the trailer  featuring modi and british adventurer grylls taking on the elements at jim corbett national park in uttarakhand  has led  predictably  to many jokes and memes  not the least of which has to do with how modi may have continued to shoot for this episode even after the pulwama attack in february.the prime minister is now at the receiving end of his supporters  favourite question  where were you when soldiers were sacrificing their lives  one almost wants to be that journalist who asks  aapko is waqt kaisa mehsoos ho raha hai also read  modi s fear of narrative is our insurance against his excessesbut if you think about it  narendra modi is actually the perfect choice for the popular survival show. here s why. . in his tweet sharing the trailer  grylls pointed out that people would see  the unknown side of pm modi as he ventures into indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation   environmental change.  and he s not wrong. remember when he told a student that  climate has not changed. we have changed   and let s give credit where it s due  his government s environment related decisions are the very definition of man vs wild. so  if he s going to create awareness about conservation and environment  it s definitely an unknown side of him and i  for one  would applaud him for embracing it. everyone should experiment with the truth at least once in their lives.people across     countries will get to see the unknown side of pm  narendramodi as he ventures into indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation   environmental change. catch man vs wild with pm modi  discoveryin on august        pm.  pmmodiondiscovery pic.twitter.com mw e amlee   bear grylls   beargrylls  july         we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now . modi is also the most qualified person in the country to be on the show. from puppies to crocodiles to cows  it s no secret that our prime minister is a true animal lover  who really feels their pain. a crucial point in his favour. . other leaders might be afraid of the dangers that lurk in the jungle  but not modi. even the venomous insects of the forest are nothing for our fearless leader. his party is known to equate illegal immigrants from bangladesh with termites  threatening to throw them out. . given that the show is all about being placed in a dangerous situation and using survival skills to emerge victorious  modi is by far the best candidate for the job. just look at how he navigated the tricky and questioning media for five years  only to return with an even bigger mandate. darwin himself could not have scripted a better example for his theory. . many critics point out that modi  being a vegetarian  won t be able to hack the jungle life. grylls  for his part  is known to eat insects when he needs his protein fix. but here  too  modi has the edge. na khaunga na khaane doonga  he had said. this  to me  displays a high level of commitment to the welfare of insects. . finally  let s look at how the show itself has been received by critics. multiple reports in the past claimed that the events and situations portrayed on the show were not quite as dangerous or even rustic as they were made to appear  but were artfully staged. and who  i ask  is better at the art of image management than our prime minister  be it gdp numbers or his stay in a cave  this is a man who knows exactly how to show what he wants people to see. so  if he wants india to think he defeated a bengal tiger  and we re not just talking about mamata banerjee here   the camera and the tiger will just have to oblige.so  really  prime minister  i m on your side on this. you deserve this.also read  shah rukh  aamir and salman now starring in  silence of the khans  under modi rulesubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




shah rukh  aamir and salman now starring in  silence of the khans  under modi rule
text size  a  a forty nine bollywood celebrities  artists and theatre personalities have spoken out this week about the allegations of growing intolerance and mob lynchings under prime minister narendra modi s rule in india. curiously  not a single signatory of the open letter was a muslim superstar.this  in an industry whose reigning troika is muslim  shah rukh  aamir and salman khan. the silence of the khans is deafening.the three have ruled indians  hearts and collective imaginations for over three decades with their tales of love  heroism  and justice. but now  bollywood s khan trinity has nothing to say. indian society has been completely left to fend for itself in the face of unexplainable hate that has gripped an otherwise  ganga jamni tehzeeb  type national consciousness. this  in spite of people like the khans who hold the kind of power and influence to appeal to peoples  conscience. a shining example of this is how islamophobia related hate crimes lessened in liverpool since soccer star mohamed salah joined the club.so  why is it so hard for the three khans to speak the obvious i was wrong about indiait wasn t always like this. two khans did try to speak up against intolerance. but they have now fallen silent.on   november       shah rukh khan said   there is extreme intolerance. intolerance religiously  not being secular in this country  is the worst kind of crime you can do as a patriot. roughly a month later  on    december  the same man said   sab kuch bahut acha hai humare desh mein. god bless india  koi problem nahi hai  aur mere saath kisi ne kuch intolerate sic  nahi kiya hai. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthat s pretty much all the thick skin the  badshah  of bollywood had to tackle the trolling and abuse that came his way once he addressed the rising spate of hate crimes in india.also read  salah effect cuts uk s islamophobia but don t count on  sallu effect  to do that in indiathe year      saw three incidents of cow related violence by mobs with    victims      per cent of them were muslims. the following year  the number of incidents rose to    with    victims and    deaths      per cent of the victims were muslims. the year      turned more brutal      victim and   deaths   while      saw mob violence reaching its peak       victims  with    killed      per cent of them muslims. so far this year     per cent of the    victims are muslims  with one person killed. these numbers are only for incidents that have been perpetrated in the name of cow.so  why does it bother me that the khans remain silent on this  because at the other end of the bollywood spectrum are the anupam khers and the kangana ranauts. they leave no stone unturned when it comes to hero worshipping the very government under which intolerance towards minorities has seen a rise  while spewing hate themselves. just look at the tweets of paresh rawal  payal rohatgi and koena mitra.hindu  sikh  buddhists immigrants should not be removed from india as as their religion originated in  bharat. they have  ancestralhistory. muslim immigrants should be removed from india as their religion didn t originate in bharat  we have given   countries from bharat   them. pic.twitter.com hce l x vy   payal rohatgi   team  bhagwan ram bhakts   payal rohatgi  april         veterans like amitabh bachchan also don t shy away from politically motivated statements. he rightly criticised the petrol hike during upa    but simply became oh so oblivious to the petrol hike when it happened under the modi government.add to this mix  the new ducati riding gurus. on a daily basis  they dish out unscientific mumbo jumbo. this further helps right wing ideologues  who lack a scientific temper  and peddle quackery. and people love it. you need to watch nityananda or jaggi vasudev to know what i m saying. but when these gurus embellish their  enlightenment  workshops with statements like  liberals are fanatics   things become dangerous.liberals have been murdered for less.also read  communal violence in the time of modi has a distinct shade. here s whyi m not really politicalmaybe it s not the khans  job to speak up against the social and political climate.maybe i ll accept this argument. maybe their job is to sit in their vanity vans and go about living their lives   setting their hair  getting a six pack  playing themselves on the big screen repeatedly  not you  aamir  they don t need to be political. they don t need to talk about things that ll bring their friday earnings down from rs     crore to rs     crore. i get it. fair enough.however  since when did talking about swachh survekshan  jalyukta shivar scheme and actively campaigning for a political party not become political so  toeing the line of the government is fine because you re doing this for the larger good  but calling out the ills in society for the larger good of society is wrong because you re not political like that  i need someone to decipher this hypocrisy for me.i didn t do say thatthe khans are particularly sensitive because they are artistes and you re not supposed to harass these sensitive beings into doing the right thing. you need to let them do it at their own pace.the thing is  all of them did do the right thing  and they all retracted from it.also read  one thing was distinctly rotten about      gujarat riots  use of rape as a form of terrorso  it s not sensitivity but cowardice.aamir khan  in very clear terms  spoke about intolerance and how he and his wife discuss leaving the country.he  just like shah rukh khan  not only retracted his statement but went to the extent of saying that what he said was  something that was not true .salman khan  though  did not pretend to be concerned at all. he went ahead and campaigned for the party of his choice  the bjp  which  to be fair  is completely honest of him. soon after  he was acquitted from the hit and run case  in which he had allegedly driven over people sleeping on the pavement  killing one. since then  he s conveniently gone radio silent politically.i can t see itmany right wingers suggest that india is secular because the khans are at the top in bollywood. so  the khans should be ashamed of themselves to talk about  intolerance .what the right wing ecosystem forgets is that the exponential rise of their ideology in india is only half a decade old. the khans became the sensations that they are in the early    s. they didn t rise through hate. they rose in an india emerging from the clutches of license raj and getting cable tv.films ditched the overdone angry young man for the loveable boy next door. and the khans fit perfectly.but in today s india  there are open calls being given to not buy  kanwars  made by muslims. just as there are calls by an sp mla not to buy anything from bjp  read hindu  shops.and probably  the khans didn t get this new memo.hate is gushing like sewage through the minds of most in  new india   and people who can actually speak up about it choose to sit in their ivory towers   their mannats and jannats   unbothered.also read  aparna sen   ramachandra guha should know sending letters to modi only makes him look goodi prefer to stay out of these thingsjuxtapose this with the west. hollywood speaks up because they realise that the sum total of all individuals is the society we live in. no one can escape the malady of hate once it enmeshes with the fabric of society. be it  metoo or black lives matter or even islamophobia  hollywood has come forward and addressed it unabashedly.yes  theirs may be a different society now  but they ve also once been where we are   fresh at the precipice of hate. there was a time when america went into a civil war because some people believed in slavery and others didn t  and those who didn t  fought against it. you don t become a just society because of the blessings of god. you work for it.when you don t talk about injustice  when you don t acknowledge the targeted hate that minorities face in india  you disassociate yourself from the very society that made you who you are. that s not just apathetic  that s selfish.shah rukh khan  salman khan and aamir khan should know that a simple question like  where is this anger stemming from in young india  can make the millions of people who follow them to stop and introspect. their voice is powerful. it can still make a difference. you don t have to be overtly political in your message. but know that your silence is deeply political.the author is a political observer and writer. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




aparna sen   ramachandra guha should know sending letters to modi only makes him look good
text size  a  a the letter sent to prime minister narendra modi by a group of eminent citizens  including aparna sen  mani ratnam and ramachandra guha  against intolerance is an example of how courage and good intention can be disastrous when removed from judgement.nothing spells bad judgement than doing the same futile thing over and over again  and expecting a different result. that  according to einstein  is insanity. the truth is that well intentioned protests like these  far from weakening the politics of intolerance  reinforces it. this is because these protests misconceive the nature of the ruling bjp dispensation under modi.the letter expresses concern over  religious identity based hate crimes  and states that  jai shri ram  has become a war cry associated with several lynchings.but what these artists and historians are missing is this  we are ruled by a populist government  whose politics is entirely based on mobilising the  real  people against the elites  particularly the literary and cultural elites. it s based on victimhood  the notion that the  westernised  cultural elites look down with scorn on the people of the country  their culture and their religion. so  when the ruling regime sees writers  actors and filmmakers protesting against them  it s safe to assume they feel more excited than threatened. in fact  it s exactly the grist to their populist mill that they require from time to time.we have been here before. and we learned nothing from it.also read  celebrities  letter to modi shows selective outrage  prasoon  kangana      others hit backvoters don t listen to celebritiesin       scores of writers and poets returned their awards to protest against communal violence in the country. the same year  aamir khan sparked off a controversy by saying that kiran rao was considering whether to move out of the country with their child due to the prevalence of an atmosphere of  intolerance . after a backlash  aamir swiftly caved in  claiming that his comments were twisted and neither he and his wife could ever think of leaving india.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmore recently  naseeruddin shah claimed that he fears for the safety of his children in the india of today. and just before the      lok sabha elections  hundreds of filmmakers  writers  and theatre personalities signed separate petitions asking voters to defeat the bjp  and their politics of hate. as it turned out  the bjp returned with an even bigger majority in the      lok sabha elections.that voters don t listen to celebrities is clear enough. but by taking part in the bjp s morality play of  rootless elites   sullying the good name of the nation  versus the good people of india  the celebrities enable their politics. in a sense  they are like the people arnab goswami brings every night to shout at. they achieve no purpose  other than being a punching bag of populist rage  but without them  there could be no show.also read  arnab goswami screams at aparna sen but she was conducting a press conferencerevolting against populistsit is true that historically  artists have stood out as a powerful force against authoritarianism  going back to the french revolution. from rabindranath tagore to faiz ahmed faiz to vaclav havel  poets and playwrights have played a central role in the struggle against repressive regimes. however  the voices of artists are mainly powerful in an authoritarian state based on repression  where they inspire people to rise up against an already unpopular regime. in contrast  populist authoritarians derive their power from popular consensus  and  therefore  tend to be immune to the protests of artists  which they skilfully portray as against the popular will.we see a similar dynamic playing out in the united states  led by another populist. donald trump relishes the fact that most of hollywood is vocally against him  and loves feuding with hollywood celebrities such as robert de niro and meryl streep. according to californian professor valerie o regan  such feuds with hollywood stars benefit trump  reinforcing his brand as  the voice of the little people against the liberal elite . michael cobb  a political science professor who has studied the impact of celebrity endorsements on politics  also reckons celebrity opposition to trump is  likely to be wasted . cobb concludes that not only are celebrities not persuasive in changing political attitudes  but people find them  less likeable and less credible  after learning they hold opposing political views.also read  narendra modi and the art of being a right wing messiah and left populistlet the art speakit would  of course  be legitimate here to ask what is the alternative  should artists be mute spectators while people are being lynched in the streets in the face of a silent government  this is not a call for apathy  but for a more strategic course of action.a stronger approach would be for artists to speak against the unjust order through their art. people would be more receptive to their literature  artwork and films  if they are not explicitly politicised. for instance  the parallel cinema of the   s and   s  led by directors such as mrinal sen  ritwik ghatak  and shyam benegal  strongly propagated progressive values by focusing a realist lens on social issues. and they did that without being drawn into the quagmire of immediate partisan politics. more recently  movies like mulk and article    by anubhav sinha  mr. and mrs. iyer by aparna sen  and newton by amit masurkar have provided a biting commentary on the prevailing state of affairs.the most powerful political propaganda  as the right wing knows better  is that which does not appear to be political propaganda at all.populists delegitimise dissent by assigning motives to any contrary opinion. by writing protest letters  artists make themselves easy targets to be painted as  serial modi haters  and  peshewar nirashawadis   professional pessimists  bent on bringing down the popularly elected government.so  it is imperative for artists to  appear  above the immediate  partisan political fray. this would then give them the credibility and the moral authority to powerfully speak against contemporary injustices through their art. it is finally time the dissenting artists ditch the letters and the speeches  and let their art do the talking.the author is a research scholar in political science at the university of delhi. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




ambitious economic targets could embarrass modi govt if it doesn t show greater purpose
text size  a  a the modi government does not make life easy for itself when it sets ambitious targets that most people would consider unachievable. among them  taking up the share of manufacturing in gdp from    per cent now to    per cent by       doubling farmers  incomes  also by       doubling exports by       and of course  getting gdp from   .  trillion  approx. rs     lakh crore  last year to    trillion  approx rs     lakh crore  by       implying   per cent average annual growth on the back of   per cent inflation .the government is doubtless encouraged in its ambitions by the fact that it has managed enormous progress on  if not quite achieved  some other stretch targets   to do with cooking gas availability  highway construction  renewable power  banking inclusion  and ending open defecation.but it is one thing to achieve specific targets  like building toilets  concentrating effort and resources  combined with dedicated project leadership  can deliver a lot . and quite another to deliver on ambitious macro economic goals that require a loosely controlled system to coordinate phased action within tight deadlines and the right policy framework. the government has been good on the first  not so good on the second.take export growth  which in the last five years has been all of   per cent. what kind of changes and effort will it take to deliver     per cent growth in the next six  when the global trading environment has deteriorated  manufacturing as a share of gdp has been stagnant through the life of the first modi government  other than the change in share that followed the re jigging of gdp numbers   so why should one expect a    per cent increase in share in the next few years  as for doubling farmers  incomes  the government simply does not have the policy tools and the financial wherewithal to deliver.also read  govt should ensure health of banks doesn t depend on who owns themsome of the unreal goal setting dates back a few years  and is possibly of a piece with the foolish talk in the initial years of the first modi government that gdp growth would soon be in double digits. in today s more realistic mood  even if one sets aside the issues raised by arvind subramanian and accepts the gdp numbers as officially recorded  growth has dropped to an average of   per cent in the last couple of years. most forecasts say  somewhat optimistically  that growth will stay at or around that level this year and the next. if the goal of    trillion by         is taken seriously  subsequent gdp growth will have to accelerate to an average of  .  per cent   something that hasn t happened since the      financial crisis. those daunted by this could argue that little is lost with a year s slippage in reaching the target. but then it would be as p chidambaram said  a mere compounding of the existing growth rate.the real issue is the direction of government policy. on protectionism and tariff policy  for instance  it is moving in the direction exactly opposite to that recommended by the high level advisory group on exports. some labour law issues are being addressed through the two labour codes that have been finalised  the core issue of delivering a more flexible labour market remains only partially addressed. and little has been done to achieve greater integration with global supply chains.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthat the path ahead won t be smooth becomes clear from the report last december by the logistics advisory committee of the economic advisory council to the prime minister. this spells out the formidable infrastructure constraints and costs imposed on exporters from india  compared to their counterparts in other countries. port logistics  including shipping  impose an additional cost equal to     per cent of consignment value  which is crippling enough. other costs are high  too  transport  capital  electricity. much work remains to be done to simplify and streamline procedures and documentation.it is early days in the new government s life. while there is talk of     day action plans  it is known that the prime minister prefers sustained incrementalism to a big bang approach. still  his government will need to show greater purpose quickly if the macro targets set out are not to become embarrassments.also read  india is running out of time to capitalise on its demographic dividendsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




   things modi has promised to achieve by     
text size  a  a narendra modi sold us a dream in      called  achhe din    the good days that were about to come.as soon as he won in       he forgot all about  achhe din . in       he gave us a new dream   new india        making us forget the  achhe din  deadline of     . bringing back indian money from abroad  hah now that he has won in       he is making us forget  new india       and instead  making us think of  five trillion      .by       it is likely he will give us a new slogan that extends the deadline to       or so.a few days ago  union minister for information   broadcasting  prakash javadekar  presented a    day report card of the new modi government. we have heard of governments marking their first     days  but    days is a first. very soon the government may start presenting weekly report cards since they love creating occasions out of thin air  and every occasion is an opportunity for publicity and propaganda.javadekar said that the government has  in its first    days  created a  roadmap  for making india a    trillion economy by     .also read  maximum schemes  minimum welfare  how the modi govt fell into the same trap as upawe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowgiven the unimaginative budget  the only achievement of the modi government s first    days in power has been to come up with a new dream  a new slogan  five trillion economy by twenty twenty four.curiously  we now hear very little of new india     . there s only one reference that javadekar made to      in his    day report card  and this was to the indian space research organisation s gaganyaan project that seeks to land an indian astronaut on the moon.the government is likely to harp so much on      that they will make us forget it promised to bring the moon down to indian soil by that year      trillion by          trillion by          trillion by      already  modi has managed to make us all debate whether or not india can be a    trillion economy by       deflecting us from asking more urgent questions like  when will the economic slowdown end  anyone who asks questions about the current mismanagement of the economy and refuses to dream about five trillion dollars is  according to the prime minister  a  professional pessimist .let us be professional optimists  and hope that we will have a new india by       as promised. for the record  here s a list of things the modi government promised to do by    august       the   th anniversary of india s independence.also read  modi govt  .  takes a shot at  minimum government  maximum governance   . these promises have been culled out from many sources  but largely from the niti aayog s document   strategy for new india      . the list is far from comprehensive  taking mostly those goals for which numerical targets have been given.india s gdp growth rate will be      per cent by     . . the investment rate will increase from    per cent in         to    per cent in        . . every indian will have a bank account  life insurance  accident insurance  pension and  retirement planning services  by     . . farmers  incomes will be doubled by     . doubled from what base  which year  has cleverly never been specified. and incomes will anyway increase with inflation. income is not profit. .  provide irrigation to all farms  har khet ko pani  with improved on farm water use efficiency  more crop per drop .  . there will be no crop residue burning to reduce air pollution. . pm  .  levels will come down below    by     . . every household will have an lpg cylinder. . by       indian railways  safety standards will be such that nobody will ever die   zero fatalities   in a train accident.  . the mumbai ahmedabad bullet train will be completed by       but railway minister piyush goyal now says this was never the deadline. it s december     .also read  here s how modi govt can help make india a    trillion economy  . the growth rate of the manufacturing sector will double by       from the base of  .  per cent between         to        .  . every indian will have a house by     .  . every indian will have a toilet by     .  . every indian will have      electricity supply by     .  . every gram panchayat  not every house  will have broadband internet reaching it by     . this was supposed to have been done by     .  . the government will ensure  hundred per cent digital literacy  by     . in other words  every indian will know how to use the internet.  . every indian will have a water connection by     . this deadline has already been extended to      without pretending it was ever promised to be delivered by     .  . india will be free of malnutrition by     .  . seven hundred district hq hospitals will be turned into  medical centres   whatever that means  through public private partnership.  . private industry will be made to adopt primary healthcare centres  phcs  to train healthcare professionals  upgrade technology and improve patient outcomes.  . twenty medical free zones  mfzs   will be created to attract medical tourism   telemedicine  e consult  telepathology  teleradiology etc  .  . hundred plus new tourist destinations will be created in under developed areas.  .  increase india s share in global international tourist arrivals from  .   per cent to   per cent. increase the number of foreign tourist arrivals from  .  million to    million. double the number of domestic tourist visits  from       million in      to       million visits   the niti aayog document on new india      said.  .  set up    innovation districts where entrepreneurs and designers live  work and play  and  connect artisans to market places using digital platforms.   . manual scavenging will be eradicated.  . imparting of skills as philanthropy will be promoted  and  skilling as a compulsory exercise from class  th   skill schools for senior secondary and higher secondary  will be started.  .  proportion of formally skilled labour from the current  .  per cent of india s workforce  will be increased to at least    per cent .  . two three million jobs in the healthcare sector  and    million jobs through tourism and   million new jobs through mines and minerals will be created.  . all single use plastic will be banned by     .also read  in the next five years  modi will need to fulfil promises without blaming congress  . india will have     gw of renewable energy capacity by     . the current capacity is   gw.  .  reduce imports of oil and gas by    per cent by        .   .  accelerate the growth of the mining sector from   per cent in         to    per cent  with an average growth of  .  per cent during           the niti aayog document said.  .  double the length of national highways  nhs  to   lakh km by         from the existing  .   lakh km.   . all delayed infrastructure projects as of       some of which have been in the works for decades  will be completed by     .  . the female labour force participation rate will be    per cent by     .  . india s forest cover will increase to    per cent from the current    per cent. this one should be easy since india has already been showing an increase in forest cover despite increasing urbanization  simply by changing the definition of forest cover.  . no student in any school in india will drop out before completing class   . no student will be out of school.  .  achieve a doctor population ratio of at least         who norm         and nurse population ratio of at least        who norm        by        .  currently  there is only one allopathic doctor for every        indians.  .  increase the gross enrolment ratio  ger  in higher education from    per cent in         to    per cent by        .   .  achieve the bharatmala phase i target by completing        km by          including       km of coastal and port connectivity roads. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




to defend modi govt s rti act changes  bjp released a  factsheet . it doesn t have much facts
text size  a  a india s right to information act is under attack. surreptitiously  and without any public consultation  the narendra modi government introduced a bill in parliament that aims to undermine the independence of information commissions   the final adjudicators under the rti law. the bill was passed on    july by the lok sabha  where the ruling bjp dispensation has a brute majority  despite strong resistance from opposition benches.the amendments have been widely opposed by users of the rti act. in response  union minister prakash javadekar has termed opposition to the bill a  deliberate and mischievous attempt by a section to malign the government . further  the bjp has now circulated a factsheet titled   rti amendment bill        don t fall for fear mongering . unfortunately  the  facts  on the list do not appear to stand up to scrutiny.also read  why modi govt is drawing flak for amendments to rti actautonomous to caged parrotthe first  fact  states that the amendments will not impact the autonomy of the information commissions. this was also a claim made by department of personnel and training minister of state jitendra singh in lok sabha on the grounds that no amendments have been proposed in section       of the rti law  which deals with the independence of information commissions.section       of the rti act states that the general superintendence  direction and management of the affairs of the cic shall vest with the chief information commissioner who may exercise powers and act autonomously  without being subjected to directions by any other authority under the rti act.it is  however  well established that to ensure institutions function without government control  a critical pre condition is that the powers to decide tenure  salaries and terms of service of the functionaries of the institution should not be vested with the executive.the rti act currently fixes the tenure of information commissioners at five years  subject to the retirement age of    years. further  sections    and    of the law state that the salaries  allowances and other terms of service of the chief of the central information commission shall be the same as that of the chief election commissioner. those of the central information commissioners and state chief commissioners will be on par with election commissioners. the chief and other election commissioners are paid a salary equal to the salary of a judge of the supreme court  which is decided by parliament.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe fixed tenure and high status conferred on commissioners are to enable them to carry out their functions autonomously  without fear or favour  and direct even the highest offices to comply with the provisions of the law.modi government s proposed amendments empower the central government to decide the tenure  salaries  allowances and other terms of service of the chief and other information commissioners of the central information commission and all state information commissions. this will result in completely undermining their independence and will effectively make them function like  caged parrots . commissioners will be wary of passing directions to disclose information that the central government does not wish to provide.also read  modi govt wants bureaucrats to address complaints against information commissionersnot an  anomaly another  fact  being circulated is that the government is bringing the amendments to correct an anomaly in the rti law   namely  information commissioners being treated on par with functionaries of the election commission  even though the latter is a constitutional body while information commissions are statutory bodies. this contention is inherently flawed. there is nothing in the constitution or any law that prohibits this practice. in fact  the principle of statutorily securing tenure  and protecting the terms of service by equating it to functionaries of constitutional bodies  is routinely adopted to ensure independent functioning of statutory oversight institutions like the central vigilance commission and the lokpal.also read  how a    day dharna over minimum wages in rajasthan resulted in the rti actwhat about the salaryaccording to the bjp factsheet  another anomaly that the amendments seek to address is that salaries of information commissioners are at par with supreme court judges although the orders of commissioners can be challenged before high courts. this  again  is inexplicable.section    of the rti act states that   no court shall entertain any suit  application or other proceeding in respect of any order made under this act and no such order shall be called in question otherwise than by way of an appeal under this act.  orders of the commissioners can  therefore  be challenged only under the writ jurisdiction of the courts. in the last    years  since the law was passed  hundreds of decisions of information commissions have been challenged in high courts. there is no evidence to suggest that the status of information commissioners being equivalent to that of judges of the supreme court have hindered the ability of high courts to examine  or even set aside  decisions taken by information commissions.in any case  decisions of the president  governors and the prime minister can also be challenged under writ jurisdiction in the courts. surely  it is not the contention of the bjp that the status of these functionaries cannot be at par with that of the judges of the supreme court and  therefore  must be downgraded.also read  chief information commissioner to have same status as cec  rules supreme courtit is clear that the modi government is attempting to bring regressive amendments to the sunshine law without being able to provide any proper rationale for doing so.the rti act has been one of the most empowering pieces of legislations for millions of people in the country  who have used it to hold governments accountable and show truth to power. the proposed amendments will have an extremely debilitating impact on peoples  fundamental right to know. it is imperative that the rti amendment bill be referred to a select committee by rajya sabha to enable detailed deliberations and public consultations on its various provisions.the authors are members of the national campaign for peoples  right to information  ncpri . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




trump is no fool   this is why he deliberately lied about modi s kashmir request
text size  a  a with bated breath we await sunrise in washington dc to see what president donald trump will do next. will he double down on his claim that prime minister narendra modi asked him to mediate on kashmir  will he be enraged that the ministry of external affairs has tagged him and effectively said he lied  and then repeated it in parliament today we have seen  potus s remarks to the press that he is ready to mediate  if requested by india   pakistan  on kashmir issue. no such request has been made by pm  narendramodi to us president. it has been india s consistent position       raveesh kumar   meaindia  july         let s be clear about two things  first  this will blow over until the next storm in a tea cup  and second  no country   except israel  saudi arabia  and qatar   has found reliable ways to deal with trump. let us be equally clear that modi has never asked trump or any external interloper to interfere in bilateral matters. modi is a stickler for rules and follows the brief his bureaucrats prepare for him to the t. trump is no one s fool  although the democrats would like you to believe that. assuming that trump is a fool is the biggest mistake one can make  something the democrats don t seem to understand even after their rout in the      us presidential election.that said  there is no doubt trump is lying  no  he didn t misunderstand what modi may or may not have told him  he is deliberately lying . the question is why  we should be worrying not about  what  he said  as indians are at the moment   but  why  he said it. the  what  is not important  the  why  is critical. i have discussed the more macro reasons here  but what we need to do now is understand how this episode will play out.let us be clear  the indian economy is in doldrums  and the standard indian practice has been to play ostrich at home  and the perpetually petulant victim abroad. in effect  our failure at domestic policy leaves our diplomats with few choices   none of them viable. but what is inexcusable is that they have either failed to read the signs in advance or haven t been heard at the top.also read  after trade war  trump wants to punish india for russian defence purchasessince barack obama s second term            the signs of india fatigue have only been growing  be it on patents  or a host of other issues. trump has simply distilled that fatigue and accelerated its effects. to start with  he refused to come to india for the republic day celebrations citing  scheduling constraints . that he took a month to decline the invitation should make it clear that there were no prior commitments  just higher priorities.he has travelled to saudi arabia and executed a remarkable about turn of his saudi hate. the saudis had to sign an agreement for us     billion in immediate weapons purchases with a total of us     billion committed over    years. trump then shifted his attack to qatar  calling it  a funder of terrorism at a very high level . the qataris had to buy their way out  agreeing to spend billions of dollars within months  be it in weapons purchases or oil refining. the three incidents   turning down india s invitation  travelling to saudi arabia  and training and then un training his guns on qatar   should have flashed warning signs to india.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowyet  what did india do  it had ivanka trump speak at a leadership conference. the fact that india thinks it can buy off a president with intangible platitudes says a lot about how badly our assessment has gone wrong. and yet  we still fail to learn the lessons. the initial     dialogue of defence and foreign ministers was ostensibly postponed  again due to prior commitments. it pretty much forced india to sign up for comcasa and lemoa in order to get the     going. but there again  these foundational agreements haven t translated into any tangible gain for the us. this is why we had trump tweet about tariffs once more  he initially raised india s duties on harley davidson in his      state of the union speech .india has long had a field day putting tariffs on american products. no longer acceptable    donald j. trump   realdonaldtrump  july        meanwhile  trump saw the highly hostile statements on kashmir  clearly sanctioned from the very top  emanating from moscow. former russian ambassador to india  vyacheslav trubnikov  a confidante of russia s afghanistan point person zamir kabulov  had said   the solution to afghanistan lies in kashmir . far from any backlash  india proceeded to give russia close to us   billion worth of arms deals for the s     and second akula class submarine. contrast this with pakistan. pakistan can offer trump minor tangibles in afghanistan  which have a disproportionate political effect back in the us  pakistan understands this well . pakistan has trump in a monopsony situation by being the only supply route  with russia and iran having been alienated.also read  trump s vanity makes pm modi look stronger   and gives him a chance to fix economy at homewhat was all this meant to signal to trump  tweet on tariffs  you won t get anything  we ll keep throwing sweet nothings your and ivanka s way. but attack us on core interests like kashmir as trubnikov did  actively undermine indian interests as kabulov had  and you would get us   billion. trump clearly internalised this message. in the end  there is no conclusion other than that india has brought this upon itself. it should have read the warning signs  it didn t. there should be no doubt that trump has done this to extract a price. how steep that price will be  shall be determined by what trump believes  the reality of the indian economy or modi s hype. in the end  modi may very well end up becoming a victim of his own successful marketing campaign.the author is a senior fellow at the institute of peace and conflict studies. he tweets  iyervval. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




trump s vanity makes pm modi look stronger   and gives him a chance to fix economy at home
text size  a  a potus  ostensibly the world s most powerful individual  just fell a little bit in the eyes of its friend and natural ally   india. the ministry of external affairs pointed out  within minutes of us president donald trump s video telling pakistan prime minister imran khan that pm narendra modi had requested him to mediate on kashmir becoming public  that there was no question of any of the above.this is not about conversation being lost in translation. prime minister narendra modi s english may not be similar to imran khan s oxbridge accent  but at least he is a freely elected prime minister. not even in gujarati  would modi dream of telling an american president that he should mediate in kashmir.in public  india isn t likely to say much more. modi would have probably pursed his lips this morning as he read the papers and called external affairs minister s. jaishankar to explain the inexplicable turnaround of a man who had last accused pakistan s leaders of  lies and deceit. also read  it s impossible to believe two incredible countries can t solve a problem like kashmir  trumpin private  too  modi will look beyond trump at the larger india us canvas. after all  he is likely meeting the us president when he goes to the us in september  by which time the india us relationship must lift itself up from an attempted deathly blow that trump doesn t even know he s delivered.frank g. wisner  a powerful former us ambassador to india who single handedly stopped p.v. narasimha rao from testing a nuclear weapon in       told theprint over the phone   don t listen to trump. edward luce of the financial times  who wrote the      book in spite of the gods  the rise of modern india  in a detailed thread on twitter  asked why trump would carry out such an act of self harm  and said we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhe is the vainest leader on the planet  and he is profoundly ignorant. he thinks he can solve any crisis   his own genius is all that is missing. therefore he does not need to know anything about said crisis. the only knowledge worth knowing is that trump s skills are absent     https   t.co jmjgehmjqe   edward luce   edwardgluce  july         a third us analyst with intimate knowledge of us india relations added   trump doesn t read anything. he thinks he knows everything. he probably never read the briefs he was given on india. thing is  he even likes india. but he probably never read or understood anything related to kashmir or the sensitivity of the matter. while c. christine fair  a keen pakistan watcher and one of south asia s ablest analysts whose book on the lashkar e taiba is essential reading  told theprint that trump s comments are largely driven by  the trade imbalance between the us and india  including tariffs on a harley davidson bike that few want to drive .fair may have something there. in his inaugural comments with imran khan  trump said   we have many things to discuss  military and terrorism and trade. and i think we re going to spend a lot of time talking about trade because we do very little trade with pakistan compared to what we could be doing and should be doing  also read  us plays down trump s  embarrassing  remarks on kashmir  says it stands ready to assistironically  commerce minister piyush goyal and his us trade representative counterpart robert lighthizer are meeting in a few weeks in washington dc to discuss precisely this  how to reduce tariffs on apples  almonds  medical devices and other products that have upset india so much.goyal could argue that the americans hit the modi government hard  and on the same day it was elected with a majority not seen since       by withdrawing benefits on indian exports.but  because india must look ahead and conduct its most important relationship with good grace   and because modi will meet chinese president xi jinping in varanasi a month later   it has already decided to withdraw high tariffs on    products  including apples and almonds  it slammed against the us in retaliation.despite potus  terribly ignorant remarks on kashmir and modi  india knows it needs the us. not just to deal with china rising with such quiet determination across the region  but to help stabilise its own economy at home. unfortunately  the decision to demonetise in      was done totally independently of the americans. if the economy at home is in such poor shape  with unemployment at a    year high  then modi must find the wherewithal at home to fix that.so  how can modi deal with the most insensitive american leader since richard nixon  who sent an aircraft carrier into the bay of bengal in      to scare off india also read  with trump cosying up to pakistan  india has reason to feel like it needs a new friendactually  modi doesn t have to do very much  besides treating the remarks with the contempt they deserve. he should let his ministers do the talking   jaishankar will surely be withering in his responses with his us interlocutors only to find that they probably agree  off the record.second  engage more  not less. modi should offer to withdraw tariffs not just on the    products  but also on other us goods  including the harley davidson bike that potus loves so dearly. removing the surcharge on the super rich and other conditions on fdi would be the smartest thing to do this week.by diversifying its trade and other relationships  modi should send the message to america and the rest of the world that india is open to business   and kashmir is a domestic matter.third  modi should take a leaf out of p.v. narasimha rao s book and reach out to the opposition on kashmir. when the going got tough in       rao sent atal bihari vajpayee as the head of a delegation to the human rights council in geneva  where kashmir was high on the agenda.significantly  the substantial critical commentary by us analysts on trump s remarks suggests that the us government would like to privately continue to deal with india on a priority basis.also read  will trump be the us president to cure the world of the  global migraine  called pakistan pakistan is a real headache  trump will find next week  when pakistan army chief gen qamar javed bajwa  who accompanied imran khan to the us and was only one step behind him as he walked with trump in the white house  pulls the taliban puppets on strings that he controls.what trump wants is flattery and obsequiousness. he rivals mohammed bin tughlaq in wanting to be the centre of attention.by treating him courteously  india   and modi   should just hold her peace. after all  it is a      year old civilisation. the rest will  naturally  follow.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




speak against modi govt s revenge on activists before there is no one left to speak for us
the lok sabha has debated and passed the protection of human rights amendment bill      last week  which the narendra modi government claims will strengthen the human rights in our country. sadly  as i pointed out in the lok sabha  it falls considerably short of this objective   and this may be by design.the bill was brought in to address international concerns about the government of india s lack of compliance with the paris principles. the paris principles  adopted by the united nations general assembly in       provide the foundational values and standards  which are required to be followed by human rights institutions across the globe. our own supreme court declared the national human rights commission  nhrc  a  toothless tiger   as i explained in the lok sabha . the modi government brought in the bill ostensibly to remedy this  but chose to conduct a piecemeal cosmetic exercise  which ignores numerous recommendations to give teeth to the nhrc and state human rights commissions   and this will not restore its credibility.it was rather ironic that the government was paying lip service to human rights inside parliament  while its instruments have been part of a systematic assault on the main human rights defenders in our country. the government s distaste for human rights lawyers are well known  for none other than prime minister narendra modi in      warned about the so called  five star activists.  after the formation of the nda government in       a cabal of ruling party politicians and their acolytes in the media started targeting some of our best reputed activists as  anti national  or as  urban naxals  in a manner which would put even the mccarthyism of the     s to shame.one of the first victims of the vindictive state was advocate sudha bharadwaj  who gave up her us citizenship and decided to use the law as a tool of empowerment by working for the rights of workers and tribals in rural parts of chhattisgarh. while harvard law school was honouring bharadwaj for her courage and outstanding work  her own government had arrested her after accusing her of naxal links.also read  modi govt treating human rights organisations like criminal enterprises  amnesty internationaltwo of the most highly respected defenders of human rights in our country  senior advocates indira jaising and anand grover  were raided by the central bureau of investigation  cbi  on    july     . far from being  five star  activists  they gave up the opportunity to have a lucrative career as legal eagles  dedicating their lives instead to fighting for the letter and spirit of the constitution of india.when a swiss pharmaceutical corporation tried to patent a life saving drug for cancer patients  anand grover fought them tooth and nail before the supreme court and eventually won the case  allowing millions of cancer patients to access the drug at an affordable price. grover spent    years fighting on behalf of the lgbtq community against the homophobic section     of the ipc  which eventually led to the supreme court decriminalising same sex relations.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowindira jaising  the first woman asg of our country  is well known for her commitment to labour rights and women s rights. she successfully argued the sexual harassment case against former punjab dgp  k.p.s gill  and represented educator and activist mary roy before the supreme court in a case that eventually led to equal property rights for syrian christian women.their organisation  the lawyers  collective  is widely admired for its contribution to the rights of marginalised sections of society. in fact  a few days before an fir was filed against the lawyers  collective  they had successfully secured bail for kargil war veteran mohammed sanaullah  who had wrongly been declared a foreigner in assam. they have often challenged power structures directly linked to the ruling establishment  especially the ruling party  on behalf of the powerless.also read  amit shah s  termite  jibe  human rights watch draws nazi germany  rwanda parallelever since       this government has shamelessly used vague provisions of the foreign contribution  regulation  act  fcra  to harass ngos fighting for human rights. the first and most obvious victim was the citizens for justice and peace  cjp  led by teesta setalvad  given their record in fighting for the right of the gujarat riots victims. as i pointed out in the lok sabha  while wilful defaulters fled our country with ease under the modi government  the authorities illegally offloaded environmental activist priya pillai from a flight to prevent her from deposing before a group of british mps about the activities of a uk company in india. they were forced to lift the travel ban after being rapped on the knuckles by the delhi high court.in       the modi government tried to stifle the lawyers  collective by suspending its license to receive foreign donations. in the same year  officials of the ministry of home affairs  mha  had inspected their records for nearly five days and they were authorised to seize any documents. the lawyers  collective even submitted numerous documents as and when they were summoned by the mha. despite this  the cbi chose to raid their offices  in a blatant attempt to humiliate them   and they took the same documents the mha had inspected more than three years ago while indira jaising and anand grover may be formidable achievers  they are elderly people being harassed by a vindictive government  which has no respect for human rights defenders. it is our duty as citizens to speak up for them   otherwise  as the german priest martin niem ller famously said  when they come for us  there will be no one left to speak for us. the international commission of jurists  the supreme court bar association  as well as many public intellectuals have raised concerns about the way jaising and grover are being treated.also read  first they came after jnu  now it s human rights activists  umar khalidhans litten  the famous german lawyer  spent many years fighting for the rights of workers during the reign of the weimer republic. he even challenged the rising  and rabble rousing  politician adolf hitler in a trial in     . when hitler eventually became the dictator of germany  he went all out to take his revenge upon litten.that risk is always there. but we must speak up when a vindictive state takes its revenge on the conscience keepers of our nation. it is well known that authoritarian governments are unable to stomach a powerful judiciary. an assault on lawyers of repute is an assault on our justice system and its larger values.let s stand with our human rights defenders even if we don t agree with the details of every case they take up. their work keeps the flame of our constitution alive. right now  it is flickering.the author is a member of parliament for thiruvananthapuram and former mos for external affairs and hrd. he served the un as an administrator and peacekeeper for three decades. he studied history at st. stephen s college  delhi university and international relations at tufts university. tharoor has authored    books  both fiction and non fiction  his most recent book is the paradoxical prime minister. follow him on twitter  shashitharoor. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




lack of opposition in parliament doesn t mean there won t be any opposition to modi govt
with narendra modi led bjp riding back to power with a brute majority and the congress not really improving on its      tally  many political experts argue that the opposition is almost dead.some have said that the congress is heading towards extinction and that s bad for indian democracy  almost conceding that the only meaningful opposition could have been provided by the congress.the general belief in political circles is that for an opposition to be effective  it must have challenging numbers in the lok sabha or assemblies. only then  can it check the ruling alliance.indian political history will tell us that such an argument is misleading and faulty.also read  opposition is feeble. modi   bjp will have to walk the extra mile to keep it alivehow indira bounced backin       the janata party  under the leadership of jayaprakash narayan  defeated the congress  almost wiping it out in the hindi belt. the congress secured     seats while the janata party won     seats. but the low numbers did not stop indira gandhi from hitting the streets and taking up public issues.and if she hadn t done so  the workers  the farmers  the dissatisfied youth would have. people s grievances do not wait for legislative numbers. in fact  when people realise that they do not have a voice in parliament or legislative assembly  they know they have only one way out    direct action .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowremember lohia doctrinethe opposition would do well to remember how ram manohar lohia in the     s first thought about defeating the congress by uniting all non congress forces. in that sense  he was the first architect of the idea of a  congress mukt bharat .the congress had won the      lok sabha election under jawaharlal nehru with a clear majority   it secured     seats. the party looked unbeatable.but the      elections witnessed a change   the congress under indira gandhi managed to retain majority in parliament  but the tally came down to    . further  the congress lost power in eight states. this marked the arrival of non congress parties in indian politics.the lohia doctrine of anti congressism  however  suffered a blow in     . the  grand alliance  of the jana sangh  the swatantra party  the congress  o   the praja socialist party and the samyukta socialist party was defeated convincingly by indira gandhi s congress.but in the next six years  a grand alliance under jayaprakash narayan managed to defeat the congress  forming the first non congress government at the centre in     .also read  pm modi urges opposition leaders to forget number of seats   be impartial in parliamentrise of bjpin fact  the legislative numbers  argument also falls flat when we look at the rise of the bjp.how did the party survive  grow and expand during the years when it had little presence in parliament  in terms of numbers it won just two seats in      lok sabha elections   the congress had won     seats then. atal bihari vajpayee lost the election from gwalior. yet  the party did not go into an  extinction mode .what has changed there are enough examples in indian politics to prove that parties have come back to power after suffering big losses in previous polls. so  legislative numbers are a wrong indicator to declare a party dead.is the problem deeper  india had governments with absolute majority under nehru  indira and rajiv gandhi. barring the    month emergency  india and indians have never really felt that democracy was under threat.has something changed after       do people in private don t trust the modi shah led bjp  is that the reason they feel the need for a  strong  opposition  which can keep the party in check also read  modi shoots urdu poetry at  negative  opposition  throws evm   sardar patel tauntsopposition is not deadthe bjp s aggressive politics is for all to see.its brazen  acquisition and takeover  game  as seen in karnataka  may help it shore numbers in state assemblies. the party may ultimately win the legislative numbers game.but that will neither double the income of the farmers nor help the unemployed get jobs. these corporate style acquisitions will not bring any relief to the minorities  who are experiencing rapid marginalisation.lack of opposition in parliament doesn t mean there won t be any opposition to the government s way of functioning on the streets. democracy is not defined by the walls of lok sabha or vidhan sabha.people are at the heart of a democracy and they know when  where and how to fight for their rights. i don t see any end for democracy in india. the party that can tap people s energy and voice their grievances will stay relevant  even if it doesn t have enough numbers in this lok sabha.the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




for the alexandria ocasio cortezs   shehla rashids  trump and modi have the same playbook
this week saw some remarkable political manoeuvring from us president donald trump. the question is  what do we make of his  go back  tweets on the four congresswomen   alexandria ocasio cortez  rashida tlaib  ayanna pressley and ilhan omar  is it the new normal in us politics  where accusations of racism fly thick and fast and where not so racist house speaker nancy pelosi prefers aligning with the extreme left against a more racist trump when nancy pelosi herself was called out for racism a few days back by the  squad    the four progressive congresswomen as they are known popularly   trump swung to pelosi s defence insisting she wasn t racist. this was followed up in rapid succession by a series of tweets attacking the squad  asking them to go back to where they came from.predictably  nancy pelosi  who had been at the receiving end of the squad only a few days prior  was forced to swing to the squad s defence. while trump is difficult to predict  being the political animal he is  it s hard to believe that his defence of pelosi came from the goodness of his heart. rather he was probably using his most accomplished weapon  the twitter dog whistle  to thin the democrats even further. in this  he seems to be mirroring a strategy that narendra modi used to great effect in the run up to the      lok sabha elections.also read  rahul gandhi must decide if congress is a european ngo or a party in nationalist indiathe right strategythe basic assumption of this strategy is you get people with limited mass appeal  then the media amplifies it into a concocted national appeal  and then  these niche celebrities end up costing the left heavily in elections with the cons outweighing the pros.how does this play out in real life  remember kanhaiya kumar  shehla rashid  umar khalid  gurmehar kaur  et al  all of them were unheard of   nobodies. yet  arrests and twitter troll attacks ensured that their popularity skyrocketed in a short span of time. soon  they had twitter blue ticks as well and their follower count saw a sharp rise.the indian media  forever seeking a new leader to rally around  given rahul gandhi s abysmal failure in the      elections  posited these youngsters as the icons of a new india  an india that was talking western  post nation state political paradigms. this may have resonated with a certain minuscule ndtv watching  indian express reading  english speaking elite who identify with a post westphalian model and see more in common with munich than muzaffarpur.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhowever  the vast majority of indians probably identify better with muzaffarpur or similar towns. they  like middle classes anywhere  are economically ascendant  aspirational  mostly traditional for whom the  imagined identity  that is india  is territorial  deeply nationalistic and sacred  bharat mata .with them  slogans like  azadi  and  war  not pakistan  killed my dad  simply aren t going to fly. so  while many of them would normally vote for the old congress  and it s nationalist shibboleths  these slogans are a bridge too far  leading to a rejection of the kanhaiya kumar types.also read  why rahul gandhi s congress is in danger of morphing into a clueless ngothe wrong left turnrahul gandhi himself  exhibiting every intellectual stereotype of being a one man european ngo  forgot that the congress  legitimacy itself was based on a nationalistic struggle for independence that had made gandhi s contemporaries like rabindranath tagore deeply uncomfortable.egged on by vacuous op eds urging a further leftward shift  whatever little electability the congress had evaporated when rahul gandhi and his minions decided to identify with these   st century european norms and their gonfaloniere in india.to note  none of the congress old  or indeed middle  guard went consorting with the shehlas and the gurmehars of the world. in the end  for the electorate  the congress  left turn and identification with un electables was more fatal than modi s lacklustre economy.also read  alongside alexandria ocasio cortez  this indian origin man is out to change us politicsthe data testthe us case is slightly different. unlike india  the us is heavily industrialised. also unlike india where opinion polls have high error probability and decisions are seldom data driven  the us is all data.the industrialised  rust belt   where trump s appeal was strongest  along with the south tend to be deeply nationalistic. nationalism in the us has never been delegitimised as it had been in post second world war europe.while it is safe to say that large parts of the east and west coast do see themselves as more european  what they don t seem to understand is that even in the two geographical extremities  precisely because nationalism was never delegitimised  the idea of america s powerful destiny and uniqueness remain strong.this divide between the liberal nationalists and the euro style ultra liberal socialists in the east and west coast  is the root of the difference between the new age  squad   whose popularity is niche  and the older pelosi generation  who have a broader pan national vision and acceptability.also read  indian leaders are testing controversial economic ideas of american politiciansfor example  a recent leaked internal poll of the democratic party swing voters showed that ilhan omar and ocasio cortez had a mere   per cent and    per cent approval rating. socialism was viewed favourably by    per cent respondents  and unfavourably by    per cent.the negative responses to two of the most prominent members of the squad are no better nationally. omar and cortez s approval ratings were at    per cent and    per cent  and negatives significantly greater at    per cent and    per cent respectively  the much dreaded immigration and customs enforcement   ice  had a higher approval rating . in short  the national negative rating for the squad is significant.what trump seems to be doing is galvanising the radical left around the unelectable squad  cannibalising support from the more electable  centre left older democrats. in doing so  he is making the democrats alienate their swing voters.democrats are alarmed  but given what trump pulled off this week  are reluctant to undermine the party. if this hypothesis is correct  then it would seem trump and modi have the same playbook  taint the electable opposition by trapping them into playing second fiddle to the un electables. if that is the case  then like modi  trump is headed to a victory with a bigger margin and the democrats are waltzing into a trap  eyes wide open  but completely helpless.the author is a senior fellow at the institute of peace and conflict studies. he tweets  iyervval. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




karnataka instability to kulbhushan jadhav  this has been a good week for pm modi
two tweets stand out in prime minister narendra modi s twitter feed this week. the first  demonstrating joy over the international court of justice verdict on kulbhushan jadhav    truth and justice have prevailed    and the second  describing the  humbling  experience  on guru purnima tuesday  upon meeting sri vishvesha teertha swamiji of the sri pejawara matha in udupi  karnataka.a special day made even more special. on the blessed occasion of  gurupurnima  had the honour of spending time with sri vishvesha teertha swamiji of the sri pejawara matha  udupi. learning from him and hearing his thoughts is a very humbling experience. pic.twitter.com dcp gtf hg   narendra modi   narendramodi  july         in one photo  the modi leads the kindly old gentleman by the arm and directs him to a chair. in another  both of them are sitting down  smiling warmly at each other.would it be too cynical to ask why the pm picked a holy man from karnataka to spend time with  in the same week the supreme court told the karnataka speaker that there was no need to force mlas who had left the congress party   and presumably want to join the bjp   to come and vote on the floor of the house also read  governance has gone for a toss in karnataka as its leaders are busy saving the governmentfrom the thousands of holy men in saffron that dot this land  the pm this week picked this man from karnataka. modi must surely be given full marks for attempting to shape both earthly and unearthly events  all for the sake of his party.but the biggest feather in modi s cap these last few days has been the      verdict at the international court of justice  icj  granting jadhav not just immediate consular access by the pakistani authorities  but also the  right to defence  in a further review and retrial.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis is certainly a slap on the face of pakistan. it comes hours after the arrest of mumbai attacks mastermind hafiz saeed  even if saeed s arrest  just before prime minister imran khan s visit to the us  is to show the americans that pakistan is falling in line with fatf demands on ending terror financing . and it comes a mere three days after pakistan agreed to india s demands on how to build a corridor to the kartarpur sahib gurudwara across the border from india.this has been a good last few days for pm modi. the janata dal secular  congress government in karnataka is far too unsteady to last much longer. the goa congress has already presented itself to the bjp. even former prime minister chandra shekhar s son  neeraj shekhar  has joined the party   there was no place for him in his mother party  the samajwadi party.also read  on kulbhushan jadhav  pakistan must blame its military for another international humiliationthe bjp is well on its way to a  congress mukt bharat   and modi is a key factor in making that happen. our government will always work for the safety and welfare of every indian   modi tweeted in response to the icj decision on jadhav. this is the kind of message american presidents usually put out to their citizenry. it is the kind of message that warms the cockles of every indian s heart.to go the extra mile against pakistan and to win a small but significant victory in the jadhav case must be credited to modi. the pm demonstrated political will by insisting that india persist with the case. after all  jadhav is not the first indian   and he won t be the last   to land in the crosshairs of the isi.certainly  pakistan isn t giving up jadhav soon. it may even try him again in another military court   the icj doesn t tell pakistan what kind of trial he should get. but with access to indian high commission officials as well as a lawyer who will shape his defence  jadhav will be able to tell the world how he is being treated.in the court of world opinion  jadhav   and india   can presumably demonstrate his innocence.what is equally interesting is the complete silence that prevails around the disappearance of retired isi officer  lt col mohammed habib zahir  from lumbini on the nepal india border in april     . seems zahir travelled to nepal to accept a lucrative assignment  that paid as much as        per month  from strategic solutions consultancy.also read  kulbhushan jadhav guilty of crimes in pakistan   will be treated as per law  imran khanpakistan media reports of the time say zahir was kidnapped by india s raw intelligence agency in retaliation for the death penalty given to jadhav. one report even claimed that zahir was in the team that lured jadhav into pakistan and kidnapped him.spy versus spy games that are as old as the hills are likely to come alive again. modi s right hand man  national security adviser ajit doval  doesn t need to do too much right now  just wait until the right offer emerges. modi s external affairs minister s. jaishankar spoke to jadhav s family in mumbai as soon as the icj announced its verdict in the hague.can a kulbhushan jadhav for habib zahir  if he is in india  swap take place in       right now  modi is only exhorting his mps to attend parliament. perhaps  there isn t much more to be said  at least for the moment.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




real test of modi govt s nationalism lies in ending punjab and haryana s syl canal dispute
the supreme court of india has done what political parties and leaders of the country should have done long ago. on   july  it served an ultimatum to punjab and haryana governments to resolve their river water dispute through negotiations. i have repeatedly argued  first in      and then in       that the sutlej yamuna link canal dispute is a limited issue  which can and should be resolved through political negotiations  and not by a court order. it is ironic that the supreme court had to say this and force open a window of opportunity.on the face of it  the supreme court s recent order is somewhat odd  though. it candidly acknowledges that its      order   asking punjab to build the sutlej yamuna link  syl  canal within a year   has not been executed. instead of ordering swift implementation or punishing the guilty  the supreme court asked the two main parties to come to a settlement before the next hearing on   september. it clarifies  however  that any settlement must be acceptable to rajasthan as well  the third state involved in this dispute. it also urges the central government   at the highest level   to facilitate this compromise. legal experts might dispute the judicial merits of this order  but i find it judicious as it holds out an opportunity for reconciliation.real dispute not as bigsuch reconciliation must begin by appreciating  first of all  that this is a very limited dispute. the indus waters treaty between india and pakistan allotted the entire water of sutlej  ravi and beas rivers to india. there is no dispute about the internal allocation of sutlej water  estimated to be   .   million acre feet  maf   punjab gets  .   maf  while  .  maf goes to haryana and  .   maf to rajasthan. the only dispute is about the sharing of ravi and beas waters  estimated to be anything between   .  to   .  maf.the share of punjab was initially settled at    per cent by then prime minister indira gandhi in       but was subsequently revised to    per cent by mutual agreement of all chief ministers in       and then to    per cent by the eradi commission in     . there is a real dispute  but not as big as it is made out to be. at the most  the real dispute is about   maf water.also read  indian states have fought over shared rivers for long. modi must make them cooperate nowthe next step should be about acknowledging that most of the claims made by both punjab and haryana are full of hyperbole and political rhetoric. the fact is that the water that is allowed to flow to pakistan due to mismanagement could be more than the amount of water under dispute. the additional water  which is currently used by farmers in the malwa region of punjab pending a settlement  is valuable to agriculture in the state  but is not a matter of life and death for a state that faces a problem of excessive irrigation. similarly  the syl canal would be of critical help to the semi arid south haryana region  but successive haryana governments have used it as an alibi to cover up their unwillingness to share existing water with south haryana region.if we are willing to see through posturing and double speak on both sides  we can move towards a resolution.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhat politicians must dosuch a resolution would involve the government and the political leaders of punjab climbing down from some irresponsible rhetoric and plainly unconstitutional actions pursued by successive regimes. one  you cannot invoke international riparian law in an inter state water dispute within the country. this dispute has to be resolved within the framework laid down by the indian constitution. two  no government can simply abrogate legal agreements entered into by the previous government. thus  the punjab termination of agreements act       was ridiculous  dangerous and unconstitutional. three  no government of the country can simply refuse to obey the orders of the supreme court as the punjab government did after the orders in     .also read  govt releases details on   river projects to divert waters away from pakistanharyana government and political leaders must also step back from their rigid and myopic stance. yes  they have an upper hand in the supreme court  but the last    years have demonstrated that winning a court case does not bring water. even if the supreme court were to find a way to enforce its orders and force the building of syl canal by the central government  any sensible leader in haryana should see that an animosity with the people of punjab is not worth it. the long term interest of the people of haryana is in working out an amicable and swift political settlement with the government of punjab. haryana needs an assured time frame for the construction of the syl canal and the delivery of water. in return  haryana should be willing to settle for a lower share than granted by the supreme court decree.a framework to end disputehere  then  is my four point framework for a negotiated settlement. one  haryana and rajasthan surrender a part  say about   per cent  of their share of ravi beas water to punjab  in recognition of the water s continuous usage by malwa farmers for several decades now. two  punjab in return should agree to an assured time frame for the construction of syl canal and the unhindered passage of water through it thereafter. three  both punjab and haryana review their respective unsustainable cropping practices  excessive use of water for irrigation  and its fair distribution within the state. four  the central government should fill the vacancies in the water commission and get it to settle the dispute about the exact quantum of water available in ravi and beas. it should also find ways to plug the leakage of india s share of water to pakistan.also read  a    year old pact still settles water dispute between india   pakistanthe real question is  who will bell the cat  who will nudge both the state governments to the negotiating table and push them to a reasonable settlement  the supreme court has already taken the first step. it must keep up this pressure and not lapse into inexplicable silence as it did between      and     .but the real push must come from the central government. resolving long standing disputes between constituents of the nation is a better test of nationalism than the ability to wage a war against pakistan from tv studios. prime minister narendra modi must accept the prime responsibility of working out this agreement in the larger national interest.the author is the national president of swaraj india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why rss has chosen to remind modi shah of its key role in bjp s big election wins
there is more to the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh s decision to recall ram lal   on deputation in the bharatiya janata party as national general secretary  organisation    than meets the eye.he was there for over a decade and enjoyed a very good rapport with prime minister narendra modi and bjp president amit shah. the decision to replace him with b.l. santosh has come at a time when the party is in the process of electing a new president. if insiders are to be believed  the line between the rss and the bjp was getting increasingly blurred under ram lal s watch  with the party s electoral compulsions taking precedence over the sangh s ideology. the bjp s ideological fountainhead wanted this line to be more distinct. santosh is known to be an unyielding ideologue who  when he was in karnataka  minced no words against state bjp president b.s. yeddyurappa s questionable ways and means in his pursuit of power.the bjp couldn t have missed the message in ram lal s recall by the sangh. but it should be equally mindful of the other messages coming from the vijayawada conclave of prant pracharaks  or full time rss workers from states  who met for three days last week. their deliberations in the andhra pradesh city give rise to a big question  by giving the entire credit to prime minister narendra modi for the      lok sabha election victory  is the bjp ignoring the rss  contributions the answer is yes if one were to hear what the sangh wanted to convey. on saturday  rss sah sarkaryavah or joint general secretary manmohan vaidya told reporters that during the lok sabha elections  rss chief mohan bhagwat had given a call for     per cent voting.  to increase voting percentage and make voters aware about voting on the basis of national issues  the sangh s swayamsevaks  volunteers   too  were involved in jan jagran abhiyan  public awareness mission . also read  there is a new rss  envoy  in bjp. here s why the post is important the swayamsevaks made house to house contacts and held small meetings. the swayamsevaks made contacts in  .  lakh out of  .  lakh villages in the country. the swayamsevaks reached        out of        mandals  in the country  as per the sangh s organisational structure. eleven lakh swayamsevaks and brothers sisters of the society got involved in the public awareness mission    said vaidya.read between the lines. the message is unmistakable. the rss was detailing its contributions to election results   it deployed over a million volunteers in almost every nook and cranny of the country to tell voters about  national issues . now that s only as far as a  social and cultural  organisation could go. the rss has repeatedly asserted that it has nothing to do with politics.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbjp credits modi for wins but rss feels differentlywhat makes vaidya s statement so significant  it came on the concluding day of the first major meeting of the rss after the lok sabha elections. the sangh has been consistent in not giving any one person the credit for an election victory. on    may  when bjp leaders were frantically trying to outdo one another in crediting prime minister narendra modi for getting the bjp a renewed mandate  rss general secretary bhaiyyaji joshi issued a tepid statement   crores of people of bharat are fortunate to once again have a stable government. this is the triumph of the national forces. many compliments to each and everyone who have contributed to this victory of democracy .  the sangh was obviously not taken in by bjp leaders  hero worship.it was no different in     . when both bjp and opposition leaders were unanimously crediting a  modi wave  for the bjp s unprecedented electoral success  the rss chief chose to set the record straight  attributing it to  the common man wanting change  and not to  some individuals .also read  v satish likely to replace bjp general secretary ramlal who returns to rssit s another matter that modi  formerly a full time rss pracharak  didn t share mohan bhagwat s views. in an interview to lance price  british author of the modi effect  inside narendra modi s campaign to transform india  the prime minister said that the people were chanting for  a trusted name  not a party name  and that people believed that  modi was the only hope and wanted to see him win.  the book that contained the prime minister s interview was released in     .rss bjp equations better now than during vajpayee ruleit s nobody s argument that the rss and the bjp are at loggerheads. no  definitely not. with an rss pracharak at the helm in the government and a former leader of its students  wing  the abvp  heading the party  the sangh couldn t wish for more. it has its volunteers posted in every minister s office and its activists holding most of the ministerial positions.in his vijaydashmi speech last year  mohan bhagwat lamented how time was running out for the new education policy. and  hey presto  the draft policy document is presented to the new human resource development minister the day he takes charge. right after the bjp led government had taken over in       it wanted to push labour reforms. the labour ministry started the process of amalgamating    central labour laws into four codes to be approved by parliament. the moment the rss objected  these codes were put on the back burner.the rss imprint is everywhere in the government   in all its words and actions. the relations between the bjp and the rss are far better than what it was during atal bihari vajpayee s regime. the coordination between the two is also seamless.also read  rss enters history syllabus  nagpur university to teach role it played before     timing of rss messageyet  the rss s decision to highlight its contributions to the bjp s victory   as suggested in manmohan vaidya s unambiguous statement   is significant. it s the sangh s way of reiterating that the election verdict is not about an individual  but about a larger cause. who would understand the rss  point of view better than modi  the sangh s message  many insiders believe  is meant for the burgeoning tribe of rootless yet powerful bjp leaders who try to be more loyal than the king.the message from vijayawada has come as modi government is taking a fresh guard  expressing willingness to bite the reforms bullet  including in the labour sector. it has come at a time when the bjp has got an aura of invincibility and an impression has been created that the rss is feeding on the bjp and not the other way round.it may probably also be the sangh s way of reminding its ideological prot g  that it s time for the fulfilment of the core agenda   the construction of ram temple in ayodhya. bhagwat had reignited the debate on the issue last september  saying that he wanted the temple  very soon .the rss  annual report presented at the akhil bharatiya pratinidhi sabha in gwalior on   march this year was critical of the supreme court for not expediting a decision on the ayodhya land dispute case.  that the supreme court should find no priority for this sensitive subject associated with deep faith of hindu society is beyond understanding. we are experiencing that hindus are constantly being neglected   it said.with a former pracharak as the prime minister  the rss has been playing along with the bjp and has been mindful of its political compulsions. the bjp has also reciprocated  accommodating the rss  concerns and interests   but  obviously  not enough.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




having limited mahatma gandhi to sanitation  modi is ignoring his central message
future generations in india will identify mahatma gandhi s spectacles with toilets. gandhi was no doubt a champion of sanitation  but he was so much more.narendra modi  an astute practitioner of the politics of symbolism  has made gandhi s spectacles a symbol of the swachh bharat programme. meanwhile  efforts have been made to elevate sardar patel as a greater icon than mahatma gandhi. sardar patel is a symbol of national unity  and mahatma gandhi of sanitation. sardar patel gets the world s tallest statue  mahatma gandhi gets lip service.modi has asked bjp mps to take out a padayatra  a     km march  in their constituencies. the march shall begin on   october  mahatma gandhi s    th birth anniversary  and culminate on    october  sardar patel s    th birth anniversary.also read  gandhi valued sanitation more than independence. modi s swachh bharat is fulfilling his dreamas if that was not enough  the main task of this march will not be to spread the message of either gandhi or patel  but of modi.  the idea is to reach out to the public and seek their feedback on the government s work and their expectations from us   according to parliamentary affairs minister pralhad joshi. other issues likely to be taken up in the march are planting trees  cleanliness and the fantastic idea of zero budget farming.we can be certain that the modi government s celebration of the    th birth anniversary of the father of the nation will not include propagation of the mahatma s central message  non violence. as incidents of lynching refuse to abate  isn t mahatma gandhi s    th birth anniversary a good occasion for the government to carry out a campaign on non violence  or  the modi government could at least take up the supreme court s suggestion of enacting a special law against lynching  carry out an information campaign warning people of legal consequences of lynching and appointing a nodal officer in each district to prevent incidents of lynching.today  we are a country that suffers endless violence. violence against dalits and women  honour killings and the constant threat of communal riots   there s no dearth of violence that needs to be addressed. why  in such violent times  would narendra modi ignore mahatma gandhi s central tenet of non violence we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowperhaps  that has to do with another central message of gandhi  truth. you know how seriously modi takes the gandhian message of truth when he shows no concern for the growing menace of fake news. fake news and misinformation are being used routinely to foment communal hatred and instigate violence. will narendra modi please tell his party mps to make people aware of fake news in their padayatra  wouldn t it be great if bjp mps told people not to blindly believe whatever they receive on whatsapp that might bring us to another gandhian idea the bjp doesn t seem to like  communal harmony. in fact  communal unity was the very first agenda in mahatma gandhi s constructive programme. it says   everybody is agreed about the necessity of this unity.  sadly  we cannot be sure anymore if  everybody  is agreeing on this in today s india. just the amount of vicious communal hate you see on modi s favourite social media platform  twitter  tells you how much needs to be done. the onus is on the modi government  in this    th year of mahatma gandhi s birth  to carry out a campaign for communal harmony.also read  for much of his political career  narendra modi has been trained to dislike mahatma gandhibjp mps will be focusing primarily on villages in their yatra  and the joke that zero budget farming is will be justified in the name of gandhi s call for villages to be self sufficient. in other words  don t expect the government to help farmers. to double your income  reduce your input costs. but gandhi s idea of swaraj wasn t merely about self sufficient village economy. it was about devolution of power to the people.in this    th year of mahatma gandhi s birth  modi should pay homage to the idea of swaraj by giving full statehood to delhi  the world s second largest urban centre. instead of centralising ideas like  one nation one election   modi will hopefully use the gandhian principle of swaraj to devolve more powers to municipal corporations. this may need some nudging of state governments  which shouldn t be difficult since the bjp has    chief ministers.finally  gandhi s message of removal of untouchability cannot be ignored by modi in this    th birth anniversary. untouchability and associated forms of discrimination against dalits still continue. in the last three years     manual scavengers have died by entering manholes. they don t need to risk their lives. machines to clean sewage lines must be ordered forthwith and distributed to all municipalities in the country. that s the least modi can do in the name of the mahatma  or sardar patel if he wishes .also read  gandhi is a mahatma  i am not  said sardar patelviews are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




what modi s india must learn from aristotle and plato s warning against demagogues
plato and aristotle had diametrically opposite views on the sustainability of democracy. plato  in book   of the republic  wrote that democracy was fundamentally unstable. he said that liberty given to people made room for the rise of demagogues among them. demagogic competition for power inevitably leads to tyranny.aristotle  on the other hand  in politics  book    chapter    believed people craved an equal distribution of privileges and goods in society   something that only a democracy could provide. the desire for a more equal society would make people reject demagogues  making democracy the most resilient form of government. both of them agreed though that democracy was inherently vulnerable to capture by demagogues.with indian democracy poised at a critical juncture  as narendra modi begins his second term in office  it is worth examining if the desire for an egalitarian society  as aristotle postulated  will manage to keep demagogues in check  or if demagoguery will eventually lead to tyranny  as plato thought was inevitable.kant s reasoned willat the heart of democracy lies the kantian notion of a reasoned will. democracy decides on an issue through debate and discussion among members or their representatives  in an assembly designed for the purpose  where free speech is guaranteed. reasoned will is not just an aggregate of ideas and thoughts of the people. nor is it merely the will of the majority. as aristotle explained  reasoned will is something that emerges as a consensus out of an honest debate among people in a deliberative assembly that guarantees free speech. a majority  without due deliberation  is not the reasoned will of the people. without a robust mechanism for determining reasoned will  democracy cannot exist.demagoguery  on the other hand  is a rhetorical device to bypass the reasoned will of the people  by appealing directly to the emotions of a section of the population  often the majority.let us say a community needs to decide where to locate a school. reasoned will would require a rational consideration of suitability of site  facilities  terrain  distance  etc. a broad compromise between various interest groups on various parameters would be necessary to finalise the location. that would be reasoned will. the decision would then be put to the majority test before its adoption.also read  in the rahul vs modi battle  why shobhaa de would choose duffer over demagoguewe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowon the other hand  let us say  all the various interest groups can also be divided into two broad communities on the basis of religion  colour  or social status. a demagogue would appeal to the same interest groups  but on the basis of  say  religion  to demand that the school s location should be decided after finding out which religious group in that locality commands a majority. he would cite narratives to claim that his favoured community was denied such an opportunity in the past  or how the religion of the majority should be the foundation of the country s education system. any emotive appeal will do.this appeal to emotions of one  majority  group while pushing away the other group in order to bypass the reasoned will of the people is demagoguery. the key here is that while reasoned will requires applying reason to solve the problem  demagoguery seeks to bypass reasoning altogether  by turning the problem into an unrelated emotive issue. demagoguery is democracy s kryptonite.emotions are often more powerful than reason in rousing people into action because the demagogue deliberately chooses issues that are intrinsically linked to a group s identities with a history of fault lines separating them.we are hardwired to hate instantly. trust and love take time to work out. this makes hate a very powerful emotive tool in the hands of a demagogue. given that communities have historically faced several ups and downs  fabricating real or imagined grievances against one or the other group  whether in the past or present  is not very difficult. such issues exist at all times and only need to be invoked. in normal circumstances  these are usually ignored in favour of reasoned will. but in times of stress  conflict  or sudden upheavals  these issues come to the fore with demagogues waiting to exploit them.plato s problematic solutionif demagoguery is an ever present danger to democracy  how do we fight demagoguery the question baffled plato  who thought demagoguery would inevitably win  because every demagogue would be followed by a more skilful and more virulent demagogue  until one simply took to tyrannical rule by ending even the farce that the democracy eventually becomes in the absence of reasoned will.plato s solution to the problem was itself problematic. he favoured a dictatorship by a committee of guardian philosophers who themselves would be all but communists. plato s solution was deeply flawed. but it is worth noting here that the greatest mind in antiquity was baffled by the question of how democracy can be protected against demagoguery. that in itself tells us how difficult the problem is.also read  putin s wrong on liberalism  but so are liberals themselvesaristotle s appeal  with a caveatwhat was aristotle s solution  aristotle believed it would always be possible to build a majority around the concept of equality. equality here is not the neoliberal equality of wealth or income as measured by a gini coefficient  but equality of status  privilege  distribution of goods  and opportunity in a given society.if you envisage a society as some sort of a stratified pyramid  with plebeians at the broad base and elites at the narrowing top  you can readily see that in terms of numbers   an overwhelming majority of people in the natural state would be in favour of equality  because the lower you are in the pyramid  the greater your number  and the more your craving for equality.so  aristotle s solution was an appeal to equality  on the basis of reason and or emotion  since both were aligned to achieve the aim of defeating demagoguery. note that every religion since antiquity has been built around the appeal to equality. hinduism itself has often branched out into different streams from its main caste roots based on disagreements over equality or the lack of it.so  the astute aristotle was not very far off the mark. on the other hand  without expressly saying so  aristotle also concedes that demagoguery can only be fought by demagoguery  albeit one that is aimed at restoring equality. note that this is not the gini coefficient based kind of neoliberal equality  but the real thing.majority s role  ultimatelyfrom a commonsensical point of view  the inevitability of aristotle s preferred solution is obvious. if a demagogue seeks to divide the society into two communities on the basis of religion  what do those opposed to the idea do to fight the demagogue  obviously  the first thing is to point out that all are equal in a society. it helps if people in favour of equality are evenly spread in both communities and are willing to campaign against the demagogue and those siding with the leader  with a common approach. the other option is to carry on practising equality no matter what the demagogue says. if aristotle s pyramid holds true  the yearning for equality will inevitably prevail as the demagogic influence wanes with time.also read  rahul gandhi is as polarising as modi but indian liberals won t use that word for himhowever  application of aristotle s remedy is complicated when  a  the size of numbers massed on either side of a fault line are highly skewed  or  b  the demagogues themselves start competing with each other to gain the favour of the majority. in india s case  muslims are just    per cent of the population  while hindus are    per cent. that is a highly skewed sample. a demagogue competing with another demagogue may be a foreboding future that still lies ahead of us. but getting rid of demagoguery depends on the reasoned will of the majority  and not the minority. it is the majority s yearning for equality that will help us defeat demagoguery.what are the practical consequences of the aristotelian view about contesting demagoguery that derails democracy  the short answer is reinstating reasoned will of the people as the key to making democratic decisions. this is done by appealing to the yearning for equality of all citizens  whether they belong to the minority or the dominant class. second  the dominant class must lead the movement for restoring equality for all  and not just of its own members. and lastly  the movement for equality must find a charismatic leader capable of standing up to any demagogue within the polity.equality  liberty  and fraternity are the only viable answers to the threat of demagoguery.sonali ranade tweets  sonaliranade. sheilja sharma tweets  arguingindian. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi and boris johnson are linked by superpower fantasies
 the downbeat economic forecasts for britain made in the early days of brexit are finally beginning to come true. yet boris johnson  britain s likely next prime minister  is determined to yank his country out of the european union by oct.   .  do or die   he asserts  insisting with churchillian pomposity that britain can be made great again.as the world watches aghast  britain s descent into political lunacy seems complete. but there is little point blaming  as many do  johnson s moral character or lack thereof. his illusions of regaining national power and wealth are widely shared across the atlantic   and beyond.in india  a conviction that the country will soon be a global superpower have suffused popular culture as well as official discourse  it helped lead to the reelection last month of prime minister narendra modi  who denigrates all previous indian leaders and claims to be the only one equipped to fulfill india s long delayed tryst with destiny.economic growth is asthmatic  unemployment is the highest it s been in decades and  in the latest phase of an unfolding environmental calamity  chennai  one of the country s largest cities  has run out of water. still  as the financial times reported last month  india under modi remains  a nation seemingly intoxicated by the belief that it can muscle its way to the global high table. such a damagingly poor grasp of reality in both countries raises an urgent question  how did the world s oldest and largest democracies succumb to extreme delusion boosterish outsiders didn t help. western politicians  think tanks and commentators greatly exaggerated india s prospects during the heyday of globalization in the mid     s. much was made of its  new middle class    in reality  working people who had only just escaped acute poverty.in the obsession with their increased buying power  little attention was paid to the lack of such collective goods as decent schools and hospitals. it is now clear that those looking for a friendly democratic counterpoint to communist ruled china became too eager to promote india as effortlessly  rising   ignoring the grave political  economic and environmental perils in its path.likewise  those dazzled by britain s cultural prestige tended to overvalue its democratic institutions  which have proven to be utterly sclerotic  and its self serving ruling class  even if they didn t miss the deep problems of its economic model  an overgrown financial sector  polarized job market and   what was crucial in shaping the brexit vote to leave   regional inequality.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthese external assessments in turn barely compared to the high value many indian and british elites assigned themselves. boosting themselves without inhibition  they became prisoners of a fantasy derived from   th century  the century when britain became the most powerful nation on earth  defining with its military and economic muscle abroad and political stability at home  the very meaning of national power and wealth.indian leaders promised their young population a similar kind of omnipotence  brexiteers did the same to their aging base. needless to say  anger and frustration were inevitable. for  regardless of what admiring foreigners said  and what modi and johnson might promise  the present and future of india and britain are shaped by domestic choices made at crucial junctures in the past.the failure of britain to match in the     s and     s the postwar industrial strategies of germany and japan made it the long term loser of world war ii. india s failure to invest in education and health  at the same time economies such as south korea and taiwan were building their skilled industrial labor forces  made it a permanent laggard in the race to build a labor intensive manufacturing sector   historically  a crucial precondition for superpowerdom.having made its fateful choices  britain could  at best  manage its decline. india s ruling classes ought to be devoting themselves exclusively to addressing the basic needs of their largely poor citizens  food  shelter  healthcare and education. instead  they have busied themselves with projecting a vision of industrial and military strength  relying in the process on dodgy economic statistics and exaggerated claims about air strikes on pakistan.today  as the extraordinary appeal of pipedreaming politicians such as johnson and modi proves  fantasy has become an ineradicable addiction for many of their citizens   a way of coping with harsh and intransigent reality. but  as brexit  a prolonged act of national hara kiri  has already demonstrated  this is not only no way for a nation to live. it is a pitiful way to self destruct.   bloombergalso read  trump calls boris johnson a  good guy   and european elections give earth some hopesubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




khan market booth didn t vote for modi. this is why he projects himself as anti elitist
 with prime minister narendra modi s bjp winning an even bigger mandate in       many expected the budget to take a string of bold decisions to jump start india s economy. the budget presented by finance minister nirmala sitharaman  like almost all budgets presented by the bharatiya janata party since       proposed incremental changes. these conservative budgets are in sharp contrast to the images modi projects of himself   a populist  a disruptor. why is a self described populist pursuing gradual policy changes  other populists  like united states president donald trump  have disrupted patterns of global trade  immigration  and different forms of international engagement.politicians such as india s narendra modi  usa s donald trump  turkey s recep tayyip erdo an  philippines  rodrigo duterte  brazil s jair bolsonaro  and israel s benjamin netanyahu are some of the populists in power in many parts of the world. populist politicians are charismatic  consider themselves to be the vanguard of popular will  and display a hint of disdain towards the elites and oversight towards the non elected institutions like the press and the civil society  which they believe serve vested interests   even though populism remains hard to define.despite holding power since       when modi became the chief minister of gujarat   the prime minister presents himself as an outsider and anti elitist  the principal attribute of populist politics that has been a central feature of modi s rhetoric. he has not shied away from using his humble beginnings to present himself as an outsider in lutyens  delhi. during the      lok sabha election  the prime minister  in an interview with the indian express  claimed that his public image was because of his hard work and couldn t be attributed to the  khan market gang  or lutyens  delhi. anti elitism appears to resonate with the indian electorate  especially with the aspirational indian youth.it is important to understand that though this anti elitism may seem to be empty rhetoric from a political electoral strategy standpoint  it is often based on some notions of truth. otherwise  it would be hard to sell it to a larger public for a sustained period of time. there is some evidence that even in       india s social and economic elite did not vote for the bjp. in the national election studies  nes  survey conducted by lokniti csds  those who regularly read english newspapers  a proxy for the indian elite  were less likely to vote for the bjp than those who read newspapers in other languages  or even watched english news channels . despite losing the new delhi constituency in the      election by a considerable margin  more than  .  lakh votes   the congress party got more votes than the bjp in some of the affluent lutyens  delhi neighbourhoods such as bhagwan dass road  mansingh road  mandir marg  lodhi colony  and khan market. in the khan market polling station  congress s ajay maken received     votes while bjp s meenakshi lekhi got only     votes out of the total     votes polled.this is not to suggest that the bjp did not do well in affluent neighbourhoods in the      election. as polling booths often comprise mixed neighbourhoods  it is difficult to make any such observation with statistical precision. in fact  the bjp outperformed its nearest rivals in many booths that could be described as  affluent  across the country.also read  time modi   amit shah stop abusing lutyens  delhi. they are the new power elite in capitalpopulists present themselves as anti elitist  but they differ in the policies they adopt and how they adopt them. populists can be right leaning  narendra modi  or oriented to the left  indira gandhi . they may have humble beginnings  mayawati  or have an aura of stardom before entering politics  jayalalithaa or even donald trump . some populists pursue disruptive policies  and their disruptiveness is influenced by whether they are a rank outsider to the political system  arvind kejriwal  or have risen through the rank and file of a political party or parties  narendra modi .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowoutsider populists like arvind kejriwal or even donald trump are less likely to pursue conventional policies or strategies. it took a couple of years for the delhi chief minister to complete his transition from being an activist to a full time politician holding top public office. during this period  arvind kejriwal was known for his frequent dharnas  strikes  and constant run ins with the lieutenant governor of delhi. on the policy front  kejriwal deserted a dedicated focus   reducing the city s pollution   after the failure of his odd even policy. there is a similar  well known sense of unpredictability in donald trump s decision making  too  especially when it comes to foreign policy.narendra modi  while presenting himself as an outsider to delhi  has risen through the ranks of a mainstream political party. modi has held various organisational positions within the bjp  and was gujarat s chief minister for more than a decade before becoming the prime minister. leaders like modi have a dual objective   of ensuring their own rule while also simultaneously extending the electoral and ideological domination of their respective parties.populist regimes led by leaders embedded in mainstream political parties prefer gradualism over disruptive big bang reforms. in modi s first tenure  critical reforms like the gst were introduced in consultation with the state governments. on many fronts like disinvestment and enabling foreign direct investment  the modi government moved cautiously  often drawing the ire of its libertarian supporters for being too slow. the government was even forced to withdraw some prominent reforms like the land acquisition bill due to public pressure.also read  the holier than cow indian liberal elite is actually modi s best friend and allymoreover  except demonetisation  which was perhaps the only  shock and awe  policy decision  there is a fair bit of predictability in the policy making under modi s rule. many policy decisions taken by modi conform to the ideological position of the bjp  with a few instances of deviation. while  shock and awe  would remain an arsenal in every populist leader s portfolio  those who come from mainstream parties will rarely use it. moving forward  modi will continue to present himself as an outsider even though the policies he pursues are more incremental than radical.pradeep chhibber and pranav gupta are with the university of california at berkeley  us. rahul verma is a fellow at the centre for policy research. views are personal.this article has been updated to include additional information.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




farm to health to education  modi govt s budget has no clear vision for india s social sector
 in a departure from some of the previous speeches  this year s budget speech by finance minister nirmala sitharaman did not begin with social welfare programmes. no mention was made of the flagship scheme pradhan mantri jan arogya yojana  pmjay    much advertised as the largest health insurance scheme aimed at providing access to quality inpatient secondary and tertiary care to   .   crore poor and vulnerable families and reducing catastrophic out of pocket expenditures. nor was there a mention of the recent initiatives under the national nutrition mission or poshan abhiyaan. surprisingly  despite being a prime focus in the interim budget and the announcement of its expanded coverage  the pm kisan scheme too did not find a mention.instead  the budget reverted to the narendra modi government s old avatar   a focus on infrastructure and a mission mode model of meeting targets  this time for water.a closer look at the budget numbers reveals that while allocations for the social sector including for education  health and supplementary nutrition have increased over the         revised estimates     per cent for the school education scheme samagra shiksha     per cent for the integrated child development services  icds  and nearly two fold for pmjay   no changes were made for most from the interim budget in february.also read  modi govt s swachh bharat shows why switching to  mission mode  is helping indiain its place  we have the intention to invest rs     lakh crore in infrastructure over the next five years and a reiteration of previous commitments including those of building  .   crore houses in phase   of the housing scheme and an upgradation of          roads under the pradhan mantri gram sadak yojana.with swachh bharat construction  targets  nearly met as per the management information system  mis    it s no surprise that the new jan andolan is going to be for water. as on   july       only    per cent of rural households had piped water supply connections and less than    per cent of fully covered habitations have access to    litres per capita per day. the newly launched jal jeevan mission  under the national rural drinking water mission or nrdwm   will now go full swing in trying to ensure connectivity of piped water supply to all rural households by     . correspondingly  allocations for the nrdwm have seen a significant increase      per cent from last years revised estimates and    per cent from the interim budget.the much needed focus on india s water crisis is a welcome step and the announcement of the jal shakti ministry   made earlier   by integrating the ministry of water resources  river development and ganga rejuvenation and ministry of drinking water and sanitation will allow for a more integrated look at the water resource management. so too is the mention on the need to prioritise solid and liquid waste management  slwm . many states are only now beginning to spend on slwm  although the numbers remain low. as per data analysed by the accountability initiative at centre for policy research  in fy            per cent of total state expenditure on swachh bharat gramin and   per cent of the centre s total expenditure was on slwm.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  centre gives a lot of money to states for social welfare. a good policy  but only on paperthat no new schemes were launched isn t surprising and probably even wise given the fiscal stress on the economy. the social sector  in particular  has long suffered from a multitude of small schemes  usually in the form of centrally sponsored schemes   often causing grief to the states responsible for their implementation. the emphasis on infrastructure in order to revive the economy too isn t a surprise given the economic slowdown.what seemed missing  however  was a clear articulation of the vision for the social sector. budget speeches provide important political signals on a roadmap for the country. while this years  speech acknowledged the need to go back to some of the basics when it came to things like zero budgeting for agriculture  a relook at the uday scheme and the need  and promise to announce  a package of structural reforms  the same was missing for the social sector.also read  zero budget farming  why budget      isn t in sync with pm modi s promises to farmerswith the numerous health disasters faced by the country in the last year and the worrying trends in the second edition of the health index by niti aayog  the budget missed an opportunity to articulate a comprehensive vision for the social sector  one which focuses on coordinated efforts and convergence across departments and ministries for health  education  wash  water  sanitation and hygiene   food and social security  to ensure in nirmala sitharaman s words  that the  aasha  vishwas and aakansha  of millions of women  children and vulnerable families are fulfilled.the author is a fellow at the centre for policy research  cpr  and director of the accountability initiative  ai . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why budget      isn t in sync with modi s promises to farmers
text size  a  a expectations were rife from the budget presented by finance minister nirmala sitharaman about announcements of break through reforms particularly for the farm sector that has suffered immensely in the last few years.alas  the speech sparingly mentioned the sector  let alone announce any big ticket reforms. in fact  unlike earlier budget speeches  this one did not even have a section on agriculture as it was subsumed under the larger head of  grameen bharat .i list some key announcements and some disappointments.also read  what is zero budget farming   nirmala sitharaman s fix to double farm incomekey announcementsalthough between the lines  the dream of doubling farmers  income by         was reiterated. a new farmer pension scheme called pradhan mantri kisan pension yojana worth rs     crores was announced. to promote and deepen markets  creation of        new farmer producer organisations  fpos  was envisaged  and passing reference was made to the role of e nam and apmc in that regard. fishery sector was given a thrust as the speech proposed to create value chains and infrastructure. return to zero budget traditional farming was emphasised.one of the more progressive announcements were the cluster based scheme sfurti  scheme of fund for upgradation and regeneration of traditional industries . it is designed to promote bamboo  honey and khadi clusters. hundred such clusters are envisaged under sfurti for        .some disappointmentspm kisan allocationwe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin the interim budget  then finance minister piyush goyal allocated rs        crores to the pm kisan scheme. the scheme was designed to give unconditional cash transfer of rs       per year to about   .  crore small and marginal farmers of the country.when he came back to power this year  one of the first decisions of pm modi was to expand the pm kisan coverage to now cover all   .  crore farmers of country. with expanded coverage  the budget outlay for the year should have also increased. but that did not happen as the budget documents still earmark rs        crore for pm kisan for        . this means that either the government is not expecting a full roll out of the scheme to all farmers or it is anticipating reducing the per individual entitlement.also read  no  modi govt s income support scheme for farmers has not made mgnregs redundantno break through reforms in agri marketingin an exercise for evaluating the efficiency of procurement schemes pm aasha and mis pss  it was found that during the kharif season in          uttar pradesh paddy farmers  for example  suffered a loss of rs     crores by selling at prices lower than ruling msps. similarly  in case of soybean  madhya pradesh farmers suffered a loss of about rs     crores. while this situation may be an improvement over the past  but it is well known that government procurement systems have its bottlenecks and it can at best help not more than    to    per cent of all farmers. the system today needs a holistic disruptive reform of its agri marketing system. alas  nothing was mentioned in the budget about it.climate changefarmers in the past five years have suffered immensely due to insufficient rains  not just monsoons  but because most of the four rain seasons in a year have been drier than usual. this year too  monsoon rains are about    per cent below normal  as on   july  and are expected to be lower than normal in the entire season. close to    per cent of india s gross cropped area  gca  depends on these rains for irrigation. such a situation of consecutively dry five years has never happened in     years of indian rain history. even the water in reservoirs in some states is at its lowest level. there was an expectation that nirmala sitharaman will announce a special package for such distressed states. at least they could have made a provision for  say  diesel subsidy in drought and deficit rainfall affected areas  as it did back in          but nothing in the budget.also read  it will not rain enough in        that s more important than who comes to power in lok sabhaleverage big datadata is the new oil and with pm kisan implementation  the government is likely to have updated data on nearly all small and marginal farmers of the country. this extent and depth of data is unprecedented. if the government linked this data with other datasets  the analysis can reveal important outcomes that can facilitate policymaking. i am afraid the government does not even acknowledge the unique opportunity it has.overall  the budget was a disappointment for the farming community. if the budget is an announcement to the world and to india on the direction the modi government is likely to take in the upcoming year  then i am afraid the farmers seem to have lost importance. if pm modi still wants to hold on to the dream of delivering doubled farmer incomes by          then the current budget is clearly not in sync.the author is a senior consultant at icrier  new delhi. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india s urbanisation isn t just happening in cities. modi govt must tap these new areas
 india s urbanisation is as much a story of its large megacities as it is a story of the in situ transformation of its rural population  not just in the periphery  but also beyond. the new narendra modi government and state governments must keep this in mind while designing schemes. managing urban expansion is a major policy challenge.a rurban storyin india  very large cities co exist with a dense network of small towns. the six major urban agglomerations   delhi  mumbai  kolkata  bangalore  hyderabad and chennai   constituted about    million inhabitants in     . they are followed by a series of secondary metropolitan areas  which are state capitals and other big cities  and all these million plus cities constituted a little under a third      per cent   of the urban population in     .the urban growth in past decade is not concentrated in large cities but actually evenly distributed across various urban categories and locations. one third of the fastest growing cities are small towns  which have less than   
 population.not all these towns are administratively  urban  or statutory towns  sts   but they are counted as urban by the census since they are above the demographic and economic threshold of being  urban.  these settlements are known as census towns  cts   and together with smaller sts  they bridge the gap between india s large cities and rural areas  as nodes that supply essential goods and services to the hinterland.also read  india must shun nehruvian metropolis bias   turn to small cities for urban economic growththere are also many villages that do not cross the census threshold but show visible non agricultural functions. these new  rurban  spaces provide two main kinds of crucial linkages between rural and urban  spatial and economic.spatial periphery   the peripheries of large cities like delhi  mumbai or kolkata are growing at a faster rate than the core cities. for example  malappuram  which used to be a small municipality of        people in kerala during census       grew to an urban agglomeration of  .  million people by     . this growth came from census towns around the city.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowspatial corridor   beyond urban peripheries  rurban areas are also emerging along industrial corridors  combining cities of different sizes and villages between two separated city clusters  to create an extended urban region.economic   economically  non agricultural activities are spatially diffused  much of it outside the larger cities. as per the latest periodic labour force survey          about   .  per cent of the manufacturing employment in india is rural. stringent land use regulations and urban density policies can push firms beyond the formal city boundaries.these places are also not very different from smaller towns in terms of consumption levels or investment in private assets like septic tanks or two wheelers. neatly classifying such settlements as urban or rural biases our understanding of india s structural transformation and its associated welfare outcomes.also read  himalayan cities are looking like garbage dumps with sewage rivers. modi govt must step indichotomous governanceyet  our administrative structure valiantly attempts to govern india s settlements across clear administrative boundaries of rural and urban. the constitutional framework of rural and urban governance  introduced by the   rd and   th constitutional amendment  reflects this dichotomy.only the statutory towns are administrative urban areas  and are governed by an elected urban local body  ulb  constituted by the article     p   q of the constitution. the criteria to designate  or declassify  a place as a ulb is a prerogative of the state governments and it varies across states.cts and large villages  which constitute the rural urban gradation  are not designated as administratively urban by the state  and continue to be governed by gram panchayats.the   th schedule of the constitution places important functions like agriculture  irrigation and housing under the ambit of panchayats  while the   th schedule places urban planning  land use  water supply  roads  bridges  health sanitation and slum improvement under the purview of municipalities. this functionally distinct structure of rural and urban means that a panchayat may not be able to pursue policies that respond to the changes happening in its jurisdiction.at the union level  the government has given preference to rural over urban in centrally sponsored schemes  css . in       tamil nadu switched the classification of over     urban areas to rural  to obtain more funds from the union.also read  between gaon and governance  how modi govt s digital india is bridging rural urban dividethe dissonancesgap in services   differences in governance across the formal urban  ulbs  and rurban settlements are responsible for the gap in public services like piped sewerage or in house water connections across them  despite a private demand for these services.resistance to reclassification   one consequence of this  denied urbanisation  is that citizens resist state government proposals to reclassify them to ulbs. absence of property taxes and higher subsidies in rural areas can drive strong local interest to retain the rural urban binaries.resistance to integration   in large metropolitan areas  where public services may be the responsibility of a parastatal agency like metro water boards  people prefer to be in smaller municipalities where levels of taxation are lower.employment   these unequal service provisions across the rural urban spectrum affect the economic transformation of rurban areas. while some specific labour intensive manufacturing industries are moving out of the municipal boundary  growth restrictions prevent significant employment growth in such districts.transport   the movement of labour and spatial distribution of jobs in urban peripheries are linked to the availability of multimodal and intermediate public transport like three wheelers  but there is no clear functional domain in the rural governance framework to regulate this. as a result  despite having a low cost of operation  these modes are pushed to the fringes rather than becoming an integral part of the public transit system.also read  india is more urban than politicians knowpolicy recommendationsthe onus is both on the union and the states to overcome these rural urban binaries in the governance framework and integrate a variety of interlinked rural urban functions.stateat the state level  the effort should be to make the functional domain flexible in case of rurban spaces. even within the prevailing framework of the   th and   th schedules  it is possible to make such provisions. using this flexibility  states can transfer functions like permitting building licenses  readjusting land for variable uses  or regulating permits to the rurban areas.the size insensitive character of the urban governance framework can be also be used to functionally empower smaller ulbs or empower panchayats to provide  urban services  to citizens in cts and other rurban spaces.there is also a role for mechanisms like the district planning committee  dpc  and metropolitan planning committee  mpc  to institutionally co ordinate between rural and urban local governments.also read  don t just blame patriarchy for fewer women in india s job force. blame our cities toounionat the union level  there is an urgent need to break out of the hardcoded definition of rural and urban. neither forcing rurban areas into binaries  say through categorical conversions to sts  nor tasking the centrally sponsored schemes with location specific objectives will address their situation. scheme design should permit states to provide fit for purpose services in these areas to leverage urban characteristics.another approach is to allocate specific funds to fill the gap in key infrastructure and bridge the service vacuum between rural and urban  as in the sp mukherji rurban mission.throughout south and southeast asia  cities and their associated economic engines are beginning to be viewed  not in isolation  but as connected to their peripheries. this is a good time for the modi government to introduce an integrated approach to urbanisation  bridging the artificial divides of the   th and   th schedules.the authors gratefully acknowledge the inputs of kanhu charan pradhan while writing this article.mukta naik  a fellow at cpr  is an architect and urban planner. sama khan is research associate at cpr. shamindra nath roy is working as a senior researcher with cpr from september     .this is the twenty sixth in a series of articles titled  policy challenges            under theprint centre for policy research  cpr  collaboration. a longer version of this piece is available on the cpr website at www.cprindia.org. the full policy document on a range of issues addressed in this series is available on cpr s website.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi govt can t increase defence budget. best it can do is go for reforms
a the narendra modi government has come back to power for a second time  exploiting the national security sentiment. most defence analysts  therefore  expect a quantum jump in the defence budget to push modernisation of the armed forces  which has been languishing for the last two decades.but given the economic constraints  this government can ill afford to increase the defence budget. it should  instead  focus on launching the long pending and much needed national security reforms.is india prepared for next gen war national security planning is driven by a time tested methodology. it includes strategic review to determinethe threatsevolvea national security strategy to deal with themdecide the military capabilities requiredmatch desired capabilities with financial resourcescreate the desired capabilitymaintain and upgrade the capabilityreview and modify every five yearsindia  however  has never formally followed this approach. through a hit and trial method  we adopted a functional strategy with an aim to decisively defeat pakistan and stalemate china in all out conventional wars. military capability for this was created between mid     s and     s. regrettably  we have failed to review and modify our national security strategy  and enhance our capabilities in the last two decades.also read  funds shrinking  army wants budget      to make special allowance for gst  customs dutiesindia has failed to understand the impact of nuclear weapons and the quantum leap in military technology. with nuclear weapons  conventional wars are now pass   and neither india  nor pakistan or china faces the threat of a decisive defeat or a major loss of territory.the aim of any future war would be to inflict a psychological defeat on the enemy  using high end military technology  in a short span and force compellence. of course  unsettled borders have to be safeguarded and sub conventional conflict has to be managed. therefore  india needs to strike a balance between size and quality with respect to the armed forces.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowneed for long term reformsthis can only be done through a comprehensive strategic review. some hard decisions must be taken to carry out pending reforms in higher defence structures and armed forces  with a focus on optimisation. induction of high end technology should be prioritised. and  all these reforms must be accompanied with allocation of adequate financial resources on a long term basis.the modi government  in its first term  did nothing in this regard. the defence budget announced in february was the lowest ever with respect to the gdp.also read  modi govt needs to first get its budget numbers rightholistic defence reforms in capacity building require at least a decade for proper implementation. hence  allocation of financial resources has to be on a long term basis. it may be prudent for the government to take approval of parliament for defence reforms and acquisitions through a  national security bill . the yearly slice can be presented in the annual budget for formalisation.the economic review  despite the tinkering with the parameters and statistics  does not inspire confidence. the interim budget presented on   february was too optimistic with an eye on the elections. in fact  the finance minister may well have to do a balancing act on   july  and the revised budget estimates may actually see a net reduction in defence spending.expectations from budgetthe defence budget must provide a blueprint for a    year defence plan  which should be approved by parliament at the earliest.i do not foresee any major increase in the amount already earmarked for capital expenditure  rs  .   lakh crore  in the interim budget. allocation for defence pensions and revenue expenditure is constant and may see a marginal increase to account for inflation.the capital expenditure budget is barely adequate to meet our existing liabilities or to go ahead with approved acquisitions in the pipeline. there is no money for purchase of new equipment for modernisation. in fact  some funds may have to be diverted to make up for the shortfall of precision guided munitions in the three services.also read  bjp manifesto provides a clue about what nirmala sitharaman s first budget will look likeinstead of relying on bluff  bluster and rhetoric to justify the inadequate defence budget for our elephantine armed forces  the government should provide an outline for holistic  time bound national security reforms.lt gen h s panag pvsm  avsm  r  served in the indian army for    years. he was goc in c northern command and central command. post retirement  he was member of armed forces tribunal. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




no  modi govt s income support scheme for farmers has not made mgnregs redundant
a the pm kisan is the first major central government income support scheme for farmers in india. the narendra modi government announced the scheme in the interim budget in february and recently expanded it in its first cabinet meeting after coming back to power in may.some states  notably telangana and odisha  have introduced such schemes much earlier.the questions we need to ask are these  what are the implications of this new emphasis on income support scheme for india s existing social policy regime  particularly  has this new scheme made the mgnregs  designed primarily as a targeted anti poverty scheme  redundant  and  should the mgnregs budget be diverted to the pm kisan mgnregs funds for pm kisan the pm kisan can be financed by repurposing funds from existing schemes or with new revenue.the previous government continued to support the mahatma gandhi national rural employment guarantee scheme  mgnregs  despite its initial scepticism. but will the launch of pm kisan herald the end of the mgnregs  do they substitute each other or are they complementary also read  loan waiver a bad idea  but pm kisan will help farmers in real need  cea k.v. subramanianthe mgnregs is a well targeted scheme because of its self targeting design. a beneficiary is required to perform relatively unpleasant work for relatively little money   those who have other employment opportunities will automatically choose not to seek benefits under the mgnregs. it targets agricultural labour households  more than cultivators. in this sense  it is complementary to the pm kisan.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhowever  this self targeting feature is not costless. if the beneficiary has to give up other work to benefit from the mgnregs  the net benefit to the beneficiary is reduced. in addition  there is a material cost involved since employment is generated by building an asset  like a pond or a road  which needs material beyond labour.while previously  many mgnregs assets were public assets  a majority of them are now built on individual farms of small or sc st farmers. these assets can be farm ponds  livestock sheds or houses. providing employment through such assets can lead to considerable overlap with the beneficiaries of the pm kisan because not only is it creating assets on small farmers  land  the same target group as the pm kisan  it is also improving their farm productivity.the mgnregs and the pm kisan are thus complementary in another sense   the mgnregs has the potential to improve productivity on individual farms and  potentially  raise demand for local agricultural labour.therefore  the case for replacing the mgnregs with the pm kisan is weak.also read  don t penalise farmers for pro gm crop protest  address their concerns insteadimprove execution of mgnregsthe focus  instead  should be on fully leveraging the pm kisan s complementarity with the mgnregs. to achieve that  the government needs to take immediate steps to improve the implementation of the mgnregs.match budget provisions to demand  while  in the last five years  the government had significantly enhanced the mgnregs  allocations  these were still not sufficient to meet pending liabilities. according to the data analysed by the cpr s accountability initiative  the liabilities rose from rs     crore in fy         to rs       crore in fy          till december      . pay wages on time  an important consequence of pending liabilities is delayed wages. recent changes in payment mechanisms  ostensibly to reduce corruption   like linking payments with aadhaar   have served to exacerbate this problem  dreze       . the primary delay occurs after administrative paperwork is completed  and the funds have to be transferred to the state government account and then to the beneficiaries. link wage payments to state minimum wages   rural inflation  another consequence is stagnant wages. the mgnregs wage hikes have been  .  per cent in      and  .  per cent in     . according to cpr s accountability initiative s analysis  more than half of the states in         paid an average wage that was less than the notified wage rate. we think that the government should reconsider its decision of accepting the recommendations of the nagesh singh committee on delinking the mgnregs wages from the state minimum wages. strengthen the role of gram panchayats in asset creation  early in its previous term  the government had sought to ensure that the assets created were durable and effective. the primary approach was to emphasise  convergence  by linking assets created under the mgnregs to other asset creation programmes. prominent among these are rural housing and sanitation schemes.while  in principle  convergence is likely to improve overall efficiency  in the specific context of the mgnregs  this has served to undermine the legally mandated role of gram panchayats. the design of the mgnregs allows a unique opportunity to alter the implementation architecture for rural service delivery by devolving    per cent of the funds to gram panchayats. a critical role envisaged for them is to prepare a locally specific plan  or shelf of works in government parlance  that will link assets to be created under the mgnregs to the locally relevant needs. after all  local governments  rather than bureaucrats sitting in new delhi and state capitals  are likely to have a better understanding of local needs and will be able to identify the right kind of assets that need construction. the convergence model  however  renders this vital planning function of the panchayats irrelevant. this is because asset decisions are tied to schemes designed in new delhi rather than to the local infrastructure needs identified through local government planning. importantly  it results in centralisation of funds as vital expenditure decisions are now distanced from local governments. the emphasis on convergence ought to give way to the harder task of building panchayat capability   including basic human resources   to make plans and develop shelves of work  including assets needed to improve infrastructure on local sc st and small farmer lands. this becomes even more crucial as rural housing and sanitation is saturated and the need for infrastructure to improve agricultural productivity remains.other ways of financing pm kisanif not the mgnregs budget  can other subsidies be reduced  the case for enhancing the pm kisan by reorienting fertiliser and perhaps even electricity subsidies is strong.fertiliser and electricity subsidies  the pm kisan can transform fertiliser and electricity subsidies into a size independent cash transfer  which will leave the small farmer better off than before. according to an estimate  eliminating fertiliser and power subsidy in punjab in      could have financed an annual transfer of about rs        to every cultivator or rs        to every agricultural worker. additional taxes  the revenue from increased tax efficiency or higher tax rates can be used to finance the pm kisan. one may want to use this sparingly given the other demands on the budget.safety net  not springboardin the end  providing a safety net is just one function of the government. in a rapidly growing and an aspirational lndia  we need to also think about reliable springboards to enable rural children and youth to access the potential of the modern non farm economy. the pm kisan  in that sense  is a safety net  it is not designed to be a springboard.also read   .  lakh farmers in up yet to receive funds under modi s pradhan mantri kisan schemeit s true that income support can occasionally deliver a large bang for the buck. for instance  by easing cash constraints  it can lead to less indebtedness and better price realisations by removing the need to enter into buyback arrangements at low pre set prices. it can also encourage diversification of incomes by enabling investment in non farm activities. it can increase household savings.but beyond safety nets  if we wish to build a reliable springboard for our future  we need to build consensus on making resources available and the mechanisms for delivering high quality basic services  such as health and education  safe water supply  to everyone. here  cash is not always the king.yamini aiyar is the president and ceo of centre for policy research. partha mukhopadhyay is a senior fellow at cpr.this is the twenty fifth in a series of articles titled  policy challenges            under theprint centre for policy research  cpr  collaboration. a longer version of this piece is available on the cpr website at www.cprindia.org. the full policy document on a range of issues addressed in this series is available on cpr s website.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




like swachh bharat  modi wants mission save water. stop free water first
 water has finally risen to the top of the indian government s priority list   as i write this  prime minister narendra modi has devoted an entire episode of his monthly radio broadcast mann ki baat to the issue.putting his bully pulpit to good use  modi has called for a mass movement   like swachh bharat   to save water. since the new government took office  it has created a water ministry by folding up two older ones  set itself a goal of delivering piped water to all households by       created a water management index that ranks states and is set to roll out a whole host of measures to conserve water. the government machinery will certainly move now that modi has put his weight behind it.for the rest of the country to move  though  platitudes have to be accompanied with incentives. the stark fact is that  by and large  there are few incentives for people to save water. there are few incentives for urban water utilities   who might lose    per cent of the water along the way  to become more efficient. there are few incentives for public investment in water supply. needless to say  other than at the premium segment and in the unregulated tanker racket  no private investor will get anywhere close to the water supply business. that incentive is called price.also read  modi govt s swachh bharat shows why switching to  mission mode  is helping indiacontrary to popular belief and experience  we are not running out of water      per cent of the earth s surface is covered by water. despite the vagaries of the monsoon  india is not starved of rain. the problem does not lie in nature  but in the fact that indian society is unable to cooperate in a manner that ensures each one of us has adequate water. the scary headline should not  therefore  read  bengaluru will run out of water by       but that  karnataka is unable to work out how to supply water to bengaluru . the framing matters. unless we recognise that the water problem is a social problem  we will waste time  money and emotions on the wrong solutions.if a commodity is under priced  it will be overused. sell petrol for rs    per litre tomorrow and there will be a lot more vehicles on the road. it is no different with water.if you are among the fortunate ones to receive piped water from bengaluru s water supply board  you d be paying between rs   to rs    per       litres. it costs the board at least rs    per      litres to merely distribute the water  because the water itself   from the river cauvery   is not priced. how much does a litre of water taken out of a river or from a borewell cost  it s the same as that of a litre of water from a desalination plant  which is around rs    per      litres in tamil nadu. so piped water in bengaluru ought to cost over rs     per       litres. meanwhile  water supplied through private tankers costs around rs     per       litres  which is extracted from the ground by the tanker operator  who doesn t pay anyone for it. if water prices have no relation to its underlying scarcity  then there is no fundamental incentive for anyone to save it. the water supply board runs at a loss and has no incentive to be efficient. the consumer receives massively subsidised water and has little incentive to conserve it.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowif the efforts of the government to get people to conserve are to bear fruit  water must be priced. for sustainability  water prices must approach the marginal cost of production and distribution.also read  india is behind in the water wars with china   pakistan  it must get its act togetherbut what about the poor  how will they be able to afford water if it is so  expensive . the fact is that currently  the urban poor may already be paying disproportionately more for the water they use. households without piped connections do not receive water subsidies  and have to pay    times as much as a middle class household on a per litre basis. there are numerous ways to address water access for the poor  from vouchers  to cash transfers  to larger toll free quotas and free community taps. the point is that the rest of us have to pay the fair price of water.the same principle must apply in rural areas as well  including for agriculture. this does not mean that all farmers must be charged for all the water they use  but that some form of a price based mechanism must be introduced over time. for instance  my takshashila colleagues have proposed a model where a price mechanism can operate at the level of state governments  who can either consume water or compensate farmers for not using it.also read  not water  chennai has a governance crisis. this ex ias officer has the solutionif we begin to price water to reflect its scarcity  cost of production and distribution  more supply will come online. there will be greater investments in r d in water technology  in desalination plants  in rainwater harvesting  sewage treatment and a myriad other forms of conservation. if you can save or make money by collecting rainwater  you don t need platitudes that tell you to do it.the biggest enemy of water conservation is the concept that it is and must remain free of cost. if we cannot tackle that beast by the horns  yes  we will run out of water.nitin pai is director of the takshashila institution  an independent centre for research and education in public policy. he is also on the board of jal seva charitable foundation. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




three things that indians can expect from narendra modi s second term in power
 prime minister narendra modi s few surprises at the start of his second innings were quite predictable.he dropped veteran cabinet colleagues and inducted more former diplomats and bureaucrats  appointed a first ever bjp working president  and made a two term mp the lok sabha speaker.but these moves were along the expected lines. people were actually waiting for modi to do what they least expected from him. they had learnt their lessons in his first stint.to predict anything about his second stint is  therefore  a professional hazard. but if one reads between the lines of the prime minister s and home minister amit shah s speeches in parliament last week  at least three deductions can be made about the broad contours of politics and governance in the next five years.also read  when jai shri ram became a political tool to heckle muslim mps  it lost somethingfirst  the politics of hindutva is going to get a fresh impetus. heckling of newly elected mps  such as asaduddin owaisi  with  jai shri ram  calls by the bjp mps in the lok sabha was just the beginning.there were numerous instances in the first    working days of the   th lok sabha  which showed how the ruling party has interpreted its renewed mandate as a thumbs up for its aggressive hindutva politics.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe modi government introduced the triple talaq bill in the house   the first legislation to be tabled in the lok sabha   ignoring the parliamentary convention of first taking up the motion of thanks on the president s address.and  when the discussion on the motion of thanks started in the lok sabha  the ruling bjp chose first term mp and minister pratap sarangi to initiate it.the union minister from odisha was the bajrang dal coordinator in the state when dara singh  an activist of his outfit  led a mob to kill christian missionary graham staines and his sons. the nda government made a strong political statement by fielding him to initiate the debate.the prime minister spoke about the national register of citizens  nrc  in his reply to the debate on the motion of thanks in the rajya sabha. he said he was saddened by the lynching incident in poll bound jharkhand  but immediately scored a political point by telling the critics that calling jharkhand a hub of lynching is an insult to the state.mamata banerjee is already feeling jittery. and so are the many so called  self proclaimed secular parties. brace for a further push to hindutva politics in the days to come.also read  cycle riding pratap sarangi is  odisha s modi  who took new delhi by stormsecond  expect a more muscular kashmir policy under home minister amit shah. those who are privy to his assessment of the problem say that he believes in an iron fisted approach. he believes  they say  that in a country with over     districts  a problem spread over  three and a half districts  in a state  probably implying shopian  pulwama  kulgam and anantnag  has been made into a national crisis due to the  weak kneed  policies of successive governments at the centre.so  while the nda government will try to create better opportunities for kashmiri youth inside and outside the state and also bring development and welfare projects on the ground to woo the people   tukde tukde gangs   as shah calls them  will not be tolerated  either in kashmir or outside .that s why hurriyat leaders may be willing to engage in talks with the modi government  but they must forget about setting any terms. the bjp in its manifesto has promised to scrap article     and article   a. in his maiden speech in the lok sabha  the home minister has given a glimpse of his intent  asserting that article     is  temporary .talk to the bjp leaders and they are convinced that the bjp president and home minister would be able to deliver on this long held promise of the party in this term of the modi government. although the nda  with the support of like minded parties  is well placed to get the lok sabha s approval for a constitutional amendment  the numbers in the rajya sabha are still not favourable for the passage of such a contentious amendment.the nda is likely to gain a simple majority in the upper house in       but it would require the support of many other parties to get a constitutional amendment passed with a majority of not less than two thirds of the members present and voting. but  given how the congress manages to get itself cornered and tongue tied on the issue of nationalism   or the ruling party s version of it   the bjp may have reasons to hope that most opposition parties would develop cold feet on voting against scrapping article    .also read  modi govt shows shift in kashmir policy but a lot depends on hurriyat  and amit shahthird  the opposition camp is dead and the bjp is relishing it. the ruling party s penchant for congress bashing even in its second stint in power was evident from modi s speeches in the lok sabha and the rajya sabha last week. he kept blaming the congress for every problem the country is faced with today. as if  there was a vacuum in the last five years.when it was shah s turn to speak on kashmir  he blamed india s first prime minister for everything. but for jawaharlal nehru s decision on  ceasefire  in kashmir  there would be no pok  no article     and no terrorism today  suggested the home minister. look at how sardar vallabhbhai patel handled the merger of hyderabad and junagarh and how nehru dealt with the accession of jammu and kashmir  he said.shah almost projected nehru s prime ministership as the biggest blunder of independent india and the opposition benches listened with their heads bowed. the will to fight was over.in fact  every time a minister has faced awkward moments in this session of parliament  it s thanks to his her bjp colleagues  and not because of the opposition benches. former union ministers maneka gandhi and rajiv pratap rudy  for instance  gave a tough time to ministers prakash javadekar and ravi shankar prasad during the question hour in the lok sabha.also read  guess who can teach narendra modi to innovate in his speeches  dd sportswell into the fifth week of its second term in power  the bjp s politics is clear but there is ambiguity over the nda government s policies  except for some broad hints by the prime minister at a niti aayog meeting about pursuing a reforms agenda. if the economy finally gets a priority in modi s scheme of things  we will get a glimpse of it in the union budget friday.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india has to attack causes of land litigation. modi s ease of doing business depends on it
 an important task for the narendra modi government in its second term will be to improve the ease of doing business on two counts   contract enforcement and property registration. india is currently ranked    rd and    th  respectively  on these fronts. both these factors are greatly impacted by india s persistent problem  high number of land litigations.reduction in property related litigations is crucial for reducing judicial delays  a significant bottleneck to growth. while the former requires the modi government to make land markets more efficient  reducing delays depends on improving judicial efficiency. attacking the causes of land litigation could  therefore  yield significant improvements on both these issues. in order to do so  however  we need an in depth understanding of the composition and causes of property related litigation.india s issue with landrecent studies have pointed out that land litigation predominates among all cases in the indian judiciary   more than two thirds of litigations are related to land or property. studies have also highlighted the poor state of land records in india. these studies have been used to argue that  a  land titles are unclear and lead to litigation   b  the judicial process needs urgent reform to reduce land litigation  and  c  we have too many land laws that are at times in conflict with each other.also read  indian courts clogged with land disputes because laws keep conflicting each otherthese studies are  however  insufficient to help the government take informed policy decisions. what could help is an understanding of the nature of such litigations instead of focusing on the quantity of litigations related to land and property. for instance  there is no empirical benchmark to test whether the proportion of land dispute cases in indian courts is high or low. two thirds sounds like a high number  but what is the ideal percentage that policy makers should strive to achieve scholars have held that the high number of property disputes  and the proposed legal and administrative reforms   better land titling  better management of cases by the judiciary  and rationalising conflicting laws   are panaceas. however  some of these correlations may only be partially correct. if policy actions are taken on the basis of insufficient evidence  this may lead to wastage of our already low state capacity  and misplaced responses could create additional inefficiencies in the land market.looking at the root causelitigation occurs because a legal injury is caused to someone due to the acts or omissions of others. litigation is therefore a sign that a certain exchange between members of the society has not been conducted as per law. the overall composition of litigation within a particular domain  therefore  points to the prevalence or absence of certain kinds of economic activity. studies based on india and elsewhere  the united states and austria  have pointed towards a significant correlation between the volume and the nature of litigation on the one hand  and economic growth and development on the other.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfor example  the us national center for state courts found that in       in    of the us state courts     per cent of all contract cases were disputes between landlords and tenants  contract cases accounted for about    per cent of the total case load . this means that just landlord tenant disputes constituted about one fourth of all civil cases in these states. based on this data  one could argue that there is a problem with us state laws governing the relationships between landlords and tenants. however  one could also argue that tenancy is a common economic activity within the us  and it is natural that a substantial proportion of disputes are between landlords and tenants.also read  modi may wait before pursuing land and labor reformssimilarly  when one looks at the asset ownership profile of indian households  it is clear that land immovable property is the most commonly owned asset in india  in many cases  it is the only asset owned by indians . in such an economy  it is only natural that a high proportion of disputes would be related to property transactions. if indian households were to grow more prosperous and diversify their asset portfolios  one may expect the nature of cases before the judiciary to change to reflect this economic reality.from this point of view  the high proportion of property related litigations possibly points to the fact that transactions in land and immovable property comprise a significant chunk of economic transactions in india. it must also be kept in mind that india is undergoing rapid urbanisation  migration  and real estate growth. this means that land markets are becoming increasingly dynamic  with a larger volume of exchanges occurring on a daily basis. it is then difficult to argue  especially in the absence of more granular evidence  that property related litigation is disproportionate to the major economic activities one sees within india.in depth analysis neededthis is not to argue that the poor quality of land records and the existence of conflicting laws do not have a bearing on land disputes. however  the precise extent to which both these issues affect litigation is hard to determine in the absence of any granular analysis of the nature of litigation.a number of laws affect litigation in land that has nothing to do with the quality of land records or conflicting requirements in existing laws. these include laws pertaining to the registration of title deeds  laws of succession and inheritance  laws requiring the payment of stamp duty  and others related to land ceilings  rent control  eviction and illegal possession. such cases and their overall contribution to the judicial backlog need to be studied carefully in order to effect meaningful policy responses.also read  india s new govt should focus on easing land acquisition rulesa good example of such analysis is the cpr land rights initiative study on land acquisition cases. the study identifies land acquisition cases as a specific set of property related cases that take up a significant chunk of the supreme court s time and identifies issues like procedural irregularities that lead to a high number of land acquisition cases. this study can  in turn  point to specific issues that policy makers can address in order to reduce litigation related to land acquisition.similar studies that can uncover the nature of land and property disputes are required before taxpayer money is spent to undertake legal and judicial reforms.the author is a senior research analyst in the political economy programme at carnegie india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




it wasn t a mistake to hire  harvard  economists  but modi govt should ve paid heed to them
and so the fourth and final horseman is heading back across the atlantic. viral acharya will soon follow in the retraced footsteps of arvind subramanian  raghuram rajan  and arvind panagariya. media comment projects the country as the loser  but no one is alarmist in the way some were when rajan headed back to chicago. nor does current comment reflect the extreme fears raised by acharya in his famous speech about central bank independence. but then  neither do too many people reflect the view reportedly expressed by arun jaitley as finance minister  that one of the mistakes the modi government made was to import economists from abroad.let s be clear  the country is the loser when it loses top flight economists. but before we come to that  consider the possibility that experts can be wrong. acharya s academic qualifications and expertise in central banking are widely acknowledged  but he does have to answer questions on his record at the reserve bank of india  rbi . on his watch  the rbi s macro economic analysis has been wrong on the inflation rate as well as the economic growth rate   over estimating both. flowing from those misjudgments  he has been wrong also in his advocacy of interest rate policy  opposing two of the recent rate cuts announced by the rbi.there is the question of cultural fit. foreigners doing business with indians find that indians don t say  no  when they disagree  preferring to shift ground or resort to indirect signalling. that s unlike in the us  say  where you are expected to bluntly say  no  if that is your position. similarly  those within the indian government system do not speak out publicly against the government they serve. when you are governor or deputy governor  you do not have the freedom of speech that an ordinary citizen enjoys. differences are aired only internally.on the occasions when someone feels the need to start a public debate  it is not done in apocalyptic terms. naturally  when rajan and acharya spoke out bluntly  in the case of the former  on issues with which he was not officially concerned   it did not go down well. and yet  on the one issue  demonetisation  on which one might have expected rajan to take a stand  he became a homegrown indian  he advised against  then went along.also read  viral acharya has left rbi  but his warnings may still come back to haunt new delhistill  it was not a mistake to hire these economists. rajan s determination to clean up banking led to the asset quality review  which exposed the extent of the hidden rot. next  while it is no secret that rajan and his deputy  later successor  urjit patel did not get along  it was under rajan that patel formulated a policy framework for the rbi  making inflation control the primary goal of monetary policy. this reflected international thinking on the issue  but was contrary to the view of previous  homegrown governors like y.v. reddy and bimal jalan. still  monetary policy has been recast.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin the finance ministry  arvind subramanian s many policy prescriptions were usually ignored by the government despite his strenuous advocacy. but his report on the modal rate for the goods and services tax did get indirect acceptance  while his opposition to multiple rates has found partial purchase after his departure. subramanian has also been recognised for raising the quality of analysis in the government s annual economic surveys. but after his recent questioning of the official growth numbers  he must be persona non grata.at the niti aayog  arvind panagariya came early and left two years ago. he did not get as much face time with the prime minister as he may have expected  perhaps because his reformist thinking on macro economic policy was tangential to the approach of the modi government  which has been more interested in programmes and projects  and in specific issues like how to reform medical education. the niti aayog played its part here  but panagariya s big ideas like coastal economic zones have not materialised.today  with growth having slowed and macro economic challenges in every direction  would the government have benefited from the advice of  harvard  economists  perhaps  but judging by past record  it probably would not have paid much heed.also read  as its last dissenter  viral acharya persistently questioned modi govt over rbi s autonomysubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




no matter what modi says  jharkhand is now the hub of mob lynching
 known for its distinct tribal identity  jharkhand is largely in news today for cases of mob lynching. of the    such incidents in the past three years     muslims  four hindus  two christian tribals and one dalit have been lynched to death. the matter found a mention in parliament this week after the latest incident where    year old tabrez ansari was beaten up by a mob so badly he succumbed to his injuries the following day. prime minister narendra modi said the incident  pained  him but was quick to add that the whole jharkhand state should not be blamed.maximum cases in bjp dominated areashere s a startling fact  most incidents of mob lynching have taken place in bjp dominated regions. of the    cases  eight took place in east singhbhum district. tabrez ansari was beaten to death in saraikela   kharsawan  adjacent to east singhbhum  and also a stronghold of top jharkhand bjp leaders. chief minister raghubar das and union minister arjun munda belong to the same region.now if cases of mob lynchings are a failure of law and order  which is what the bjp leaders want people to see it as  then it is still disappointing and shameful that law and order are openly violated and mobs rule the streets in the chief minister s own backyard.tribals not involvedjharkhand is a tribal dominated state. its tribal identity was also the basis of its formation in     . but the group s share in the state s population  as per      census  is only    per cent. there is a general perception that accused in cases of mob lynching are tribals. but an analysis of these incidents clearly shows that tribals are generally not involved in them. those arrested for lynching tabrez ansari are bhimsen mandal  premchand mahto  kamal mahto  sonam pradhan  satyanarayan naik  sonaram mahli  chamu naik  madan naik  mahesh mahli and sumant mahto. another accused prakash mandal alias pappu mandal was arrested in the past as well.the point behind naming the accused is to show the social base involved in incidents of mob lynching. in the gumla incident  where a tribal christian was lynched over an ox  the accused were non tribals.also read    arrested over death of jharkhand man allegedly thrashed   forced to chant jai shri ramin jharkhand  the bjp s influence and support among the non tribals has rapidly grown. in the last lok sabha election  the non tribals played an important role in the bjp s grand victory. the police force is accused of working to deliberately weaken these cases  which means the accused escape without punishment. in one instance where they did get convicted  bjp s hazaribagh mp and then union minister jayant sinha garlanded the eight men in rampur. no tribal was accused in this case  either.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowjharkhand has witnessed two categories of mob lynching cases. one  where people are lynched on charges of theft or child lifting. victims in such cases have mostly been hindus. the other has been communal cases where muslims have been targeted because of their identity over allegations of smuggling slaughtering of cows. although tabrez ansari was accosted by the mob on charges of stealing a motorbike but the beating soon turned communal when they learned of his name. he was tied to a pole  thrashed and made to chant jai shri ram and jai hanuman.stance of bjp govt  police  mediaafter every mob lynching incident  the media has only debated whether the meat was of cow or buffalo  whether the victim carried out the theft or not. the media s stance could make one think a mob can lynch anyone on the streets as long as there s a credible view. they don t argue or show concern over mobocracy taking over democracy. a mob taking law into its own hands and then pronouncing justice on the spot is the end of law and order.in tabrez ansari s case  too  the media is largely debating whether he and two of his companions stole the motorbike on the intervening night of       june. his wife has said tabrez worked as a welder in pune. he had come home for eid  caught and beaten by the mob  and died in police custody.also read                                                            the police s role is also under suspicion. they claim that tabrez was administered first aid and his condition deteriorated on the morning of    june after which they took him to the hospital but it was already too late. two police officers have so far been suspended.the condition in jharkhand today begs a question  are these incidents of mob lynching taking place against the state government s will  the state of law and order in jharkhand has clearly deteriorated if mobs can lynch people with impunity and no one is convicted. if the motive is to communally polarise the state ahead of the assembly elections scheduled this year  then it s a much bigger concern.the author has been associated with the jp movement  and has penned a novel  samar shesh . views are personal.this article has been translated from hindi. read the original here.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in osaka  a mature modi has emerged   one who didn t make the mistake of hugging trump
it s been a lot of fun  being with you  we ve had some good talks already   said us president donald trump to prime minister narendra modi friday morning in osaka on the margins of the g    summit.if that sounded like teacher trump telling a recalcitrant student off  then you got it right. in the tv screen grab  modi is quiet  as he turns his notes over in his hands  while trump speaks nonstop sitting next to him. you deserve it  victory . you have done a great job in pulling together. i remember when you first took over  there were many factions and they were fighting with each other and now they get along   trump continued.even if you didn t vote for modi this election  he definitely had your sympathy.also read  modi can t forget trade war with us just because trump called him a  great friend  at g   certainly  the real estate dealer turned powerful world leader didn t seem to have realised that he was treating the prime minister of  .  billion people with a certain lack of grace. trump redefines the meaning of the phrase   the ugly american   not because he is loud  boorish  cruel and unkind  but because he doesn t even realise he is all of the above.it s probably why modi reacted with a certain peevishness when he and trump brushed up against each other the first two times they met   the first time in june       in the white house  when modi tried to hug him  as he is wont to do with world leaders  except trump seemed totally uncomfortable with the idea of a male embrace.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe second time around  in november       on the margins of an asean summit in manila  modi and trump got off the wrong foot because the pm felt trump had treated him  like just another asian leader. you can see why. trump must have brushed off the obvious eagerness of the indian prime minister  like so many other third world leaders are wont to do in the presence of powerful people.also read  india russia s     missile deal gets no mention during modi trump talks at g    meetingexcept india isn t just another third world country   a lesson that trump s predecessor george bush jr  he didn t know who india s prime minister was when he was the republic frontrunner in      presidential elections  and barack obama  he was extremely tough on india s nuclear weapons programme and wanted india to sign the npt  learnt fairly quickly when they met india s political leaders and diplomats. both bush and obama came around over the years  both realising the value of partnering with a democratic country in a region littered with dictators.to modi s credit  he didn t let his emotions show this time around in osaka. the prime minister has matured and he realises the world stage is actually a little bit like the hurly burly of domestic politics.the deal making  the poison tipped barb  the smiling sweetly but turning the knife within  the hard knuckles negotiation  the eye to eye stare. it s what foreign policy is also made up of.also read  faking indian accent  bear hugs  public jibes   praises   how modi trump ties have evolvedthis time around  modi didn t make the mistake of hugging trump. he assumed the quiet dignity of his office  which represents  .  billion people   even if you didn t vote for him   and let trump ramble on and on. the us president revealed his gracelessness in the manner in which he addressed pm modi. modi dealt with his loquaciousness by simply keeping quiet.both modi and trump know that their foreign office establishments have been working really hard to put together a meeting in osaka  keeping some margin for error. like the mike pompeo throwaway remark on iran being  the world s largest sponsor of terrorism  in his new delhi press conference   remarks to his own audience back home rather than the one in front of him   or trump s irresponsible tweet on the eve of his meeting with modi  telling modi that he has to withdraw tariffs on american products  or else.well  some of that will happen. it s bound to. but the stakes for india in the relationship with the us are far too important to be allowed to fray at the sight of an offensive tweet   and vice versa. trump may or may not know it  but india is doing far more than most countries in the world for the americans  by just being there  a massive country in the indian ocean  right next to china.in the next few weeks  the indo us relationship will stabilise. the us is working to send a delegation to piyush goyal s commerce ministry to figure out how to reduce tariffs that have so irked the us president. it s not a big deal. what you put on  you can easily take back.also read  modi should strengthen ties with the us but not allow trump to bully indiaosaka will be remembered for the manner in which modi bit his tongue at trump s rude remarks and went on to calmly talk to the world s most powerful leader. he vindicated the trust that india put in him  which was to separate the all important relationship with the us from the personal careless disregard that trump may or may not have for modi.can the cat catch mice  deng xiaoping may have asked himself time and again  as he embarked upon the opening up of china in     . modi faces several important struggles back home  including facing up to right wing ideologues like s. gurumurthy on issues like data sovereignty  but he also realises that india is once again on the cusp of a big dilemma. should it look ahead into the future or look back at its contested history modi is keenly aware that the ability to answer that question also  partially  lies in his hands. on the eve of his japan visit  he called for the punishment of those men lynching muslims in jharkhand. that statement was not only meant for the foreign audience that he was about to meet  but for his own people at home  those who have been fed on a relentless anti islam diet.the weeks and months ahead will show the path that modi and india chooses.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




beyond msps   loan waivers  modi govt must make agricultural market reforms its top priority
the new narendra modi government has begun its second term with the agricultural sector in crisis. farm incomes in india are growing at perhaps the slowest rate in the last    years even as there s a renewed policy push to double farmers  incomes. after a long season of farmers  protests  agrarian distress is yet to find a solution that isn t a temporary band aid.the policy debate was initially dominated by two longstanding demands of farmers  movements  higher  guaranteed minimum support prices  msps  and farm loan waivers. more recently  the political focus has shifted to income support schemes for farmers and the rural poor.but what is urgently needed is a comprehensive and systemic approach to agriculture  with reforms in agricultural markets as a top priority.not only are agricultural commodity markets central to supporting farmers  incomes  they are the connective tissue of the economy. they connect agricultural production with circulation and consumption  interlink livelihoods and logistics across agrarian and non agrarian sectors  shape relations between cities  small towns and villages  and those between local  regional  national and global markets.historically  the regulation of agricultural markets in india has been fragmented. this time  however  the effort to build a national agriculture market  nam  provides a unique context for reforms. but to achieve this vision  the central government needs to take a more contextual and comprehensive approach to market reforms.also read  why an agriculture economist wants india to dump food subsidiesfrom dashboard to drawing boardso far  the focus has revolved around e nam  which was launched in      and aims to provide a  pan india electronic trading portal  which networks the existing apmc mandis  to create a unified national market for agricultural commodities .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin its first phase of implementation  the enam scheme is reported to have networked     apmc  agricultural produce market committee  mandis across    states. of these  less than half      mandis  have reported online trading activity.field reports  including the findings of a high level government appointed expert committee  outline the challenges on the ground. in several cases  computer terminals have remained in their boxes  in others  data from offline auctions or government procurement has been retrospectively entered into the e nam portal. some mandis have avoided moving high volume commodities online due to delays in facilitating exchange  others only use e nam on a single day of the week or in off season before reverting to business as usual.in states where regulated markets are not the primary channel for trade  mandi functionaries have struggled to attract buyers and sellers into market yards  let alone getting them to bid online. and where auctions are common practice  enforcing a system of direct electronic payments for all transactions is a significant challenge for farmers  traders and commission agents with prior history of credit advances and cash rotations.learning from the first phase of implementation  there is a definite need for a reorientation in the approach  beginning with the back end first.also read  more maharashtra farmers demand gm seeds  is indian policy dictated by politics or science reforming agricultural marketsagricultural marketing reform is the proverbial  hot potato . regulatory measures to reform agricultural markets are primarily resisted on two grounds.first  local traders  commission agents and regional processors  who have gained from the dominant regulatory regime  often exercise considerable local and regional clout. the state governments find it difficult to initiate and sustain reforms to open up agricultural markets to competition.state procurement  the government s primary instrument for price support  is the second. for the vast majority of farmers  the declaration of msps without procurement has no effect on prices. and in states like punjab and haryana  where the government has become virtually the only buyer of wheat and  non basmati  paddy  it has diminished market competition and diversification  largely reducing mandis to seasonal procurement centres.public procurement has also often ended up strengthening the hand of the commercially and politically powerful in the regional markets by routing procurement through intermediaries  arhatiyas commission agents in punjab or agro processors in west bengal .there is now significant evidence to suggest that states need to change their approach towards agricultural markets.here s how they can do it  with a focus on farmers  welfare push for regulatory reform   public investmentit has been seen that when farmers are able to choose between multiple market sites and options to sell their produce  they gain not only in terms of price  but also in other areas of commodity exchange  such as accurate weighing  reduction in marketing costs and timely payment. this is why the regulatory reform to open up the current apmc mandi system to competition from multiple channels and sites of exchange is so important.also read  to help indian farmers  we have to support pepsico in its fight for the potatoat the same time  removing statutory restrictions without pushing for public investments to enhance the regulatory capacity and the logistics infrastructure is unlikely to yield long term results. in bihar  for instance  a blanket repeal of the apmc act has led to proliferation of small  self regulated private horticultural markets. at the same time  it has also led to huge infrastructural holes in major agricultural markets.changing terms of exchangein india  any policy that aims to strengthen the terms of farmer participation in markets must first understand the structural constraints that different farmers face in different commodity markets.these include constraints related to ownership of and access to land  and the extent and impact of fragmentation of farming plots. tenant farmers  sharecroppers  and small and marginal farmers experience a range of constraints while accessing resources essential for agricultural production and marketing. further  farmers also experience unfavourable terms for credit  inputs  water  storage  transport and insurance.even medium and large farmers rarely have access to risk mitigation instruments. each of these areas needs investments to support research and analysis as well as policy design and implementation.diversification and scalea critical part of the relationship between production and markets is the farmer s capacity to respond to markets by changing production decisions and diversifying cropping systems.we have long been suffering from the ecological and economic consequences of cereal centricity in agricultural policy. over the next several years  the central and state governments must chart a course to help farmers through a complex cropping transition in different regions.procurement could primarily cover neglected and underdeveloped regions and prioritise nutritious commodities  especially pulses and millets  along the lines of recent initiatives in odisha. states could also consider developing a framework for msps that incorporates risk and social externalities as proposed in the      committee report on incentivising pulse production. the recent announcement of a set of incentives by the haryana government to shift farmers from the cultivation of paddy to other crops  such as maize  arhar and soybean  is another sign that this is an increasingly urgent priority.also read  why higher msps don t really help the indian farmer in the long runsignificant public investment is needed to enable indian farmers   who are already  given all the constraints  highly responsive and adaptive   to make complex production and marketing decisions as both climate change and global commodity markets redefine the nature  frequency and extent of volatility.this calls for a long overdue revival of a broken public agricultural extension system and building resource support institutions and networks at all levels.the author is a senior visiting fellow at cpr and associate professor of sociology and anthropology at ashoka university.this is the twenty second in a series of articles titled  policy challenges            under theprint centre for policy research  cpr  collaboration. a longer version of this piece is available on the cpr website at www.cprindia.org. the full policy document on a range of issues addressed in this series is available on cpr s website.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




guess who can teach narendra modi to innovate in his speeches  dd sports
when india today flashed   pm s all out attack on cong   to describe narendra modi s speech in the rajya sabha wednesday  it seemed like  yesterday once more . although the channel repeatedly called it  modi sarkar  .    it felt increasingly like modi  .    attacks on the opposition and the congress  in particular  have been the prime minister s favourite past time since     .the pm is a master communicator and knows better than anyone how to craft his messaging  so this is said with great hesitation  isn t it time  mr prime minister  that you found a new target for your attacks as for the news channels  no sooner had modi completed his speech in the lok sabha tuesday  they started discussing his condemnation of the congress and the emergency of    june     . from times now to republic to ndtv       they travelled back    years to debate that  blot  on democracy.also read  modi shoots urdu poetry at  negative  opposition  throws evm   sardar patel tauntsfor the last one month  since    may lok sabha election results  tv news has been hunting down what remains of rahul gandhi s reputation and the congress s inability to pick itself up from the floor  dust itself off and start out all over again.and that would be fine. the congress and rahul gandhi  in complete disarray  have provided fresh ammunition each day. tv news channels could not resist exposing rahul s indifference to parliamentary behaviour when they showed him endlessly studying his mobile phone during the president s address to a joint session of parliament.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbut we are now bored out of our minds with the shenanigans of the congress.so  television news needs to take a fresh aim and train anchors on subjects and issues other than the gandhis.last week s coverage of children s deaths in bihar  notwithstanding the unnecessary grandstanding  is the way forward. however  this week  the news channels seem to have relapsed again into the easy  even lazy  way out with politics as usual.definitely unusual is the manner in which  bjpbatbratmla  wielded the sports accessory as a weapon of public rebuke  times now . videos of the offender  taking a cricket bat to a municipal worker  hit the news channels hard wednesday and they were merciless in exposing him   vvipnetagirishocksindore   exclaimed newsx. it shocked viewers too.mike pompeo would have been equally shocked. hope the us secretary of state didn t get a chance to watch tv news during his official visit to india.also read  how air   doordarshan beat ec s model code to air pm modi s a sat speechnow there are cricket bats and then there are brickbats and sometimes they go together. this brings us to some absolutely incredible coverage of cricket from that great sportscaster  dd sports.truly  it has achieved the impossible  it has shown flair and creativity to fashion a marvellously unique coverage of the world cup  which no one else could have imagined  let alone executed with such expertise.question  how do you do deliver live tv coverage of a cricket world cup match without once showing a bat or a ball  or players or even the match  you listen to the radio  wrong answer.the correct answer is that you join  icc world cup adda      live  on dd sports. here  two individuals  sometimes three  sit and periodically train their eyes on the tv monitor while they discuss anything even remotely connected to the game of cricket although not necessarily connected to the game at hand   for the entire duration of the match being played out in england.for instance  during tuesday s critical match between australia and england with the latter at       anchor gitanjali asked her guest radheshyam what he thought about players being accompanied by their families to international competitions. after an entire day s play  when the body is breaking  you need two minutes relaxation   and what better than spending time with your wife and children  he replied. of course  he added  if there is a girlfriend involved  the  social structure  in india doesn t allow for such things.after a few more words of wisdom on this matter  gitanjali broke in   you will hear things you cannot hear anywhere else    she announced  more truthfully than she could imagine.after a very short break   there are seldom any commercials on the channel   gitanjali returned to discuss a previous world cup encounter between england and australia in india       . and from a gentleman  whose name was inaudible  we heard about david boon and his  ferocious upper cut .all of this when australian fast bowler mitchell starc had just bowled a ferocious yorker to disturb the furniture behind ben stokes  and take his crucial wicket.also read  what england   wales cricket board could do to prevent washouts at icc cricket world cupwe know doordarshan does not have the rights to the world cup  we know it doesn t have much money to spend on frippery pursuits like cricket. in which case  it should simply stay at home and telecast repeats of the national games from     .still  whoever invented the adda on dd sports deserves a nobel prize for innovation. if that prize doesn t exist  they ll invent one  just as they did this adda.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




arms to almonds  mike pompeo s india visit can set the tone for modi trump meet in osaka
 the almond alliance of california is upset that india has increased tariffs on its produce as a retaliation against us tariffs on indian steel and aluminium. congressman josh harder has written to us secretary of state mike pompeo to take up the matter with new delhi when he arrives here tonight for a three day visit.then there s the other congressman  eliot l. engel  chairman of house committee on foreign affairs  who has also written to pompeo  telling him to sort things out on the india us front. there is a growing perception that the us is trying to coerce india rather than negotiate with it  engel said.the two congressmen have hit the nail on the head in terms of spelling out the ramifications of a slide in the india us relationship.there are california almonds to consider  no doubt  which earn the us      million annually.and then  there is the larger  very important strategic relationship with the us to consider. with china on one side and pakistan on the other and russia also reportedly cosying up to pakistan  india needs powerful friends to enable it to become a regional power.also read  irritants that soured india us ties   h  b visa cap  russian missiles   high tariffsthat s why mike pompeo s visit to delhi   en route to the g    meeting in osaka  which will also be attended by prime minister narendra modi   is so important.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthere are enough irritants on the cards. india is insistent  so far  on going ahead with the s     air defence deal with russia. there is the iran oil problem. there is the tension around india s draft e commerce policy  which major players like amazon and chinese companies like shein could be forced to follow. the rbi s decision to unilaterally implement data localisation norms   since s. gurumurthy of the swadesh jagran manch  sjm  joined the rbi as a non official director in       its policies have considerably hardened   has led to the piquant situation of the us threatening to retaliate by cutting       per cent of h b visas for india.although the last move has been denied  make no mistake that damocles  sword hangs over the modi government. pompeo s visit to delhi is important because it is a precursor to the modi trump meeting in osaka later this week.there are enough sensible arguments against data localisation  the most effective being that in a globalised economy leveraged by the internet  it is india that benefits. it is high time the sjm gets over its fear of the   st century version of the east india company threatening to swallow up  sone ki chidiya  mother india.this fear of the foreigner is belied every other month by prime minister modi s successful visits abroad. buoyed by the tough negotiating skills of the foreign office  the pm has successfully held his own  from trump to imran khan.in fact  india has always opened its doors and windows  as mahatma gandhi famously said  to all kinds of influences from all over the world. india is the only country in the world that has an ocean named after it   it came after centuries of trading with the east and the west and not because indians decided to stay at home fearing the unknown from across the seven seas.also read  mike pompeo  us secretary of state is a modi admirer  trump firefighter   harvard alumtrump being trump is determined to take a transactional view of things. he doesn t know any better. and since he can be assuaged with a few billion dollars  delhi  it seems  has now decided to give him exactly that by promising to buy     billion worth of defence goods from the us.delhi needs the us and nobody knows that better than external affairs minister s. jaishankar  who has dealt with a variety of us administrations since he was a mid ranking diplomat. jaishankar  who joined the bjp monday  also understands the value of getting the job done  like deng xiaoping  who famously said he didn t care about the colour of the cat as long as it caught mice.certainly  this is jaishankar s toughest hour  how to turn trump around and deliver him to modi  so that when they meet in osaka  they envelop each other in a bear hug that will resound across the world.question is  what is the win win compromise between india and the us that will allow both sides to claim victory  india needs the americans too much and cannot afford to walk away   remember  it was the us which brokered the return of wing commander abhinandan varthaman after he was captured by the pakistanis on    february  and is keeping pakistan on the grey fatf list.perhaps  india may blink on the e commerce policy   commerce and industry minister piyush goyal has had three meetings last week with various industry stakeholders. perhaps  modi will have to tell the sjm and the rss to go slow on data localisation  in osaka  standing next to his good friend japanese prime minister shinzo abe  modi cannot afford to talk about data nationalism.also read  is india risking key strategic ties with us by taxing few rich harley davidson buyers that s why pompeo s india visit is important. the deal must be brokered now  so that modi and trump and abe can announce their bonhomie to the world in osaka. if they meet behind closed doors with not even a photo op to their credit  like modi and imran khan did in bishkek  then that s a signal there s something  black in the lentils .modi must get a deal with the americans now  so he can hold his own when he meets chinese president xi jinping in varanasi in october. modi knows the chinese only respect strength. with the world on his side  modi can afford to smile sweetly at xi in varanasi.a world that is not  would be too terrible a possibility to even contemplate.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why modi s ayushman bharat failed in nitish kumar s bihar as encephalitis killed over     kids
 deaths of more than     children in bihar from acute encephalitis syndrome should be a matter of shame for a nearly    trillion economy. the outbreak of chamki bukhar  as the disease is known in bihar  is yet another incident exposing india s poor healthcare system to the world.but the outbreak in bihar s muzaffarpur district has also laid bare the limitations of the narendra modi government s pet project   the ayushman bharat yojana. hailed as the world s  largest publicly funded health insurance scheme   ayushman bharat promises to provide financial coverage for secondary and tertiary care to poor patients in private hospitals.however  with the number of children dying from acute encephalitis syndrome  aes  rising with each passing day  the focus is back on the capacity of government hospitals to tackle such health emergencies. contrary to what modi s ayushman bharat scheme promises  all the patient load in bihar has fallen on its woefully inadequate government hospitals.in times of modicareayushman bharat yojana  also popularised as modicare  was launched by the modi government in september     . the scheme provides for cashless treatment for eligible beneficiaries at empanelled hospitals. the modi government says its scheme provides a health coverage up to rs   lakh per family per year to around   .   crore poor and vulnerable families  or a population of approximately    crore.also read  litchis aren t giving encephalitis to bihar s kids  it s malnourishmentbut the catch here is that the ratio of contribution towards the premium cost of treatment of the beneficiary between the centre and the state is      . so  at the level of implementation  states with sufficient money in their coffers are better placed to make use of the scheme since they will be able to provide their share of the grant. the modi government earmarked rs       crore in its interim budget           for ayushman bharat scheme. but only those states that pay the    per cent share can avail this fund.that is where bihar has missed the bus. because it does not have the capacity and the infrastructure to absorb and benefit from the scheme.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbihar s share in modicaredata for the implementation of the ayushman bharat scheme until    june      is an eye opener. against a total of   .   lakh claims  rs       crore has been disbursed. gujarat leads the pack by securing rs     crore. other states with considerable share include chhattisgarh  rs     crore   karnataka  rs     crore  and tamil nadu  rs     crore .also read  indian tv reporters who were supporting doctors in bengal are now harassing them in biharbihar  with the second largest number of below poverty line  bpl  families in the country  after uttar pradesh   has been one of the worst performers in terms using the modi government s fund for ayushman bharat. under the scheme  the state could raise only        claims  and the amount disbursed is an abysmal rs   .   crore. uttar pradesh with  .   lakh claims managed to get rs     crore. another laggard state is west bengal  with merely        claims and rs   .   crore disbursed to it under the scheme.states like bihar bound to sufferthe ayushman bharat scheme  which claims to provide healthcare to  the poor and vulnerable families based on deprivation   does not reach the poorest parts of india. bihar and uttar pradesh that top the list of states with most bpl families are also the worst positioned to avail the benefits of modicare.first  these states lack a network of good private hospitals where the poor can easily go to avail free tertiary care. as concluded in a research paper  going by the current spatial distribution of the private health sector in india  its growth in response to the ayushman bharat national health protection scheme  ab nhps  is likely to be patchy and concentrated in geographical pockets. states like bihar  uttar pradesh and west bengal have to do a lot of groundwork  and only then can the ayushman bharat scheme reach the poor population in these states.also read  encephalitis deaths  political opportunism trumping governance in nitish kumar s bihar second  poor states do not have the requisite administrative infrastructure to enrol their underprivileged for the scheme. there are lots of logistical issues involved.and finally  these states cannot provide for their share of funds     per cent of the total expenditure   which keeps them deprived of the money allocated by the union government. states with concentration of private hospitals  good administrative infrastructure and with deep pockets will be the beneficiaries of ayushman bharat scheme.that is bad news for the poor children of bihar  who are in dire need of healthcare facilities as well as financial support.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




time modi   amit shah stop abusing lutyens  delhi. they are the new power elite in capital
modi s image has not been created by the khan market gang  or lutyens  delhi  but by    years of his toil.  that was prime minister narendra modi speaking of the elite that he and many of his admirers believe has ruled and ruined india.like everything the bjp does and says  it was both true and false.there is certainly a fairly permanent elite that has controlled india for long. but it has been five years since modi and the current home minister amit shah stormed india s proverbial swamp called lutyens  delhi. since then  they have moved with the precision of a heat seeking missile to dismantle the fortress of the intellectual and social privileged like never before.but they continue to articulate  with mock humility  their outsider ness. first  they breached the magical lakshman rekha of     and now they have breached    . they are not outsiders. modi  amit shah and the bjp are now the new lutyens   they reside in and control the swamp. they are the power elite   political  intellectual  social and cultural.also read  why does the right wing want to  occupy  delhi s liberal hotspot khan market according to american sociologist c. wright mills  the power elite is one that controls corporate  military and political decision making. while writing about post war america  he described the elite as any one of six   the metropolitan     families  the celebrities  the corporate ceos  the corporate rich  the political directorate and the warlords.adapt it to the post liberalisation india  and you get the corporate elite  who are geographically based around altamount road  mumbai  the political elite  revolving around    akbar road and    janpath  and the intellectual social elite  stretching from khan market to lodhi estate  a  .  km strip that takes in the india international centre and the lodhi garden.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin post modi india  the corporate elite remains untouched in its pre eminence. but the addresses that once attracted cheerleaders and favour seekers  the bar that was once the hub of high powered media editors  and the lodhi garden s power walk that once saw politicians as diverse as arun jaitley and digvijaya singh  have all changed.the lodhi garden s walk  in fact  has earned itself an academic dissertation by saurabh dube  who writes in mapping the elite  power  privilege  and inequality  edited by s.s. jodhka and jules naudet  of what it implied.  first  the elite walking group is far from being unified in terms of class background and prior status. rather  they represent distinct trajectories in the making and unmaking of indian capital  present and past. consider the contrasts between two of the key constituents of the group  a first generation real estate developer with uncertain educational qualifications  who has amassed vast holdings  and a scion of a venerable family   its riches  status and influence reaching back to the past few centuries. second  what binds the group is privilege  property and power as its members walk together to perform a shared elite ness turning upon money and masculinity.  well  it s pretty much on its way out  and being replaced by badly shot videos of accepting fitness challenges.politically  the centre of power has moved from akbar road to deen dayal upadhyaya marg  not ashoka road  where the bjp has its swanky new three storeyed headquarters. the pillars of the new establishment are in the vicinity. the vivekananda international foundation  where the new intellectuals plan the agenda for new india  has replaced the rajiv gandhi foundation  once the hub of strategists like mohan gopal and suman dubey. the      established observer research foundation s close links to the ministry of external affairs and its penchant for staging big ticket events to coincide with big state visits have earned it a place that rivals the centre for policy research  set up in     .also read  a khan market evening has more liberals than survive in the whole of pakistanthe bureaucratic elite that once vied for bungalows in lodhi estate is now happy to live in the tony new moti bagh with homes that have four garages  two servants  quarters and modular kitchens. the power in this government has clearly moved to lok kalyan marg  from    janpath. and on raisina hill  it is the prime minister s office  the pmo in the south block  that calls the shots with the largest staff ever      .the upscale khan market is now under attack even though the new modi ecosystem has been trying to stake claim on it for a while now  and more so since his re election. so  it s not just that new addresses are becoming sites of influence  the old ones are also being occupied.khan market itself is not what it used to be  losing some of its lustre to jor bagh  meherchand market  and the dlf mall at the chanakya.the new regime has its own key icons. ram madhav is the resident intellectual  the presiding deity of the india foundation  which he runs with nsa ajit doval s son shaurya doval. amartya sen has been edged out by professional troublemaker subramanian swamy and that eminent economist who is on the board of the reserve bank of india  s. gurumurthy. thought provoking novelist and teller of transnational tales amitav ghosh has been replaced by cartographer of change sanjeev sanyal  and national conscience keeper arundhati roy has made way for the nationalist flag bearer chetan bhagat. and the palace s poet laureate isn t javed akhtar anymore  although he was feted during the vajpayee era . prasoon joshi has been a favourite for some years now. but even he might have to cede turf to the new writer cum poet  ramesh pokhriyal  nishank   the hrd minister who has written    books.institutions where dissent first raised its voice  such as the jawaharlal nehru university  jnu   home to prakash karat  sitaram yechury and the rest of the  tukde tukde gang  have been put under the scanner. the staff composition is undergoing a change to reflect the government s new ideology. the new dissent capital is the emerging liberal arts mecca ashoka university.the pravasi bharatiya kendra is where major events now take place  with the geriatric india international centre slowly dropping off the map. the delhi gymkhana club continues to be an unoccupied tharoor quoting island  but it matters less and less in lutyens  non accented conversations now.also read  where s the outcry for ghaffar market  khan market s paler brotherthe greatest shake up has happened politically  with the rise of the naya neta  a new  young and mobile leader who has emerged from rural india as traditional caste and land relations change. many of these leaders started as small time fixers  say jodhka and naudet in their book  or middlemen who helped people in rural areas get their work done while navigating the local level bureaucracy. the social profile of those being elected to parliament has also changed.according to a study by academic kuldeep mathur  during      and       those coming from rural and agrarian background had pushed out in politics a good proportion of those coming from the urban professional background  who would belong to traditionally  upper  caste communities  mapping the elite . this change has continued. the      elections saw more people from non traditional business backgrounds making it to parliament.this change will also soon find itself reflected in the intellectual social elite as well as in a new ideology flexing its muscles. how self regenerating can this be  given that the bjp is already finding mini dynasties taking root  will determine how the elite ecosystem develops in a new india.expect little or no change in the corporate elite though. a study on top company ceos and chairpersons in india by naudet  adrien allorant and mathieu ferry has shown that while for the aspiring upper middle class  education is the open sesame that provides access to top positions  for company chairpersons owners  the case is different. not having a prestigious diploma does not preclude them from entering the small world of top capitalists. in other words  merit pales before birth when it comes to upward mobility in corporate india.the short lesson in that  no matter the new think tanks  the new watering holes  the new icons  the corporate elite s address will forever be altamount road.also read  lutyens  elites are now like marooned islands  rootless  adrift  irrelevantbut why do narendra modi and his followers continue to heap abuses at the lutyens  elite when they have occupied that space  because  they need a powerful enemy that will make them look like a victim who stands outside a door that says do not enter. this is exactly the reason why donald trump and his supporters keep chanting  drain the swamp  although the us president is standing knee deep in it.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




the terrible silence in muzaffarpur that has got everyone tongue tied  including pm modi
 at      am friday morning  prime minister narendra modi began to speak at a public ground in ranchi  jharkhand about the benefits of yoga as a life long discipline that must be cultivated by the body and mind. he inaugurated the  th international yoga day with a live address on social media  announcing a special emphasis on  yogaforheart.in nearby bihar s muzaffarpur   the distance between ranchi and muzaffarpur as the crow flies is about     km  children were still suffering from the deadly acute encephalitis syndrome as the pm sat in vajrasana  his eyes shut as he focused inwards  then stood up  raised his open palms above his head  breathed in deeply  bent down and exhaled.the smell of death is strong in sri krishna medical college and hospital  skmch  in muzaffarpur  as my colleague nandita singh reports  its shadow just around the corner.also read  bihar s snoozing govt  clueless doctors blame heat and litchis as encephalitis kills    as of    june morning  when pm modi and the world celebrated international yoga day  more than     children had died from the disease  their thin and malnutritioned bodies unable to deal with what is locally known as the  chamki bukhar .but there was not one word by modi on the ongoing health crisis in muzaffarpur.certainly  it was too early in the morning. in any case  yoga day had just begun. yoga helps streamline your life  said modi  in comments before the commencement of the mass exercises.  shanti  sadbhava aur samanvaya vaali zindagi bitaane main madad karta hai   he added. it helps maintain peace  wellness and balance in your life.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowon the  narendramodi twitter timeline  since the prime minister returned home from bishkek on    june where he met a galaxy of world leaders  there have been    posts around and about yoga   out of a total of    posts. many are animated videos of modi himself  performing a variety of asanas. several are tweets and retweets of photos from various parts of the world where yoga day is being organised  including by indian embassies. peru. new york. azerbaijan. kathmandu. kandy.the world is being connected through yoga  via linkedin as well  and modi is its sutradhar.of the remaining    posts since bishkek on twitter   as well as facebook  his own namo page and app   here s what the pm has been doing  there are two posts on the brand new mann ki baat  one letter to all sarpanches  four posts on a meeting with niti aayog  two posts on an all party meet  one post of him speaking at the start of the monsoon session of parliament  a message on the ideals and vision of sant kabir  taking the oath on    june  felicitating newly nominated bjp working president j.p. nadda  lauding navbharat times for its positive news  wishing rahul gandhi on his birthday on    june  speaking in parliament  meeting presidents of all political parties  on matters like  one nation  one election   marking bapu s    th anniversary and the development of aspirational districts   greeting president ramnath kovind on his address in parliament  tweeting to cricketer shikhar dhawan that he will be missed  and two posts on meeting mps over dinner.also read  encephalitis deaths  political opportunism trumping governance in nitish kumar s bihar but modi has remained very quiet on the muzaffarpur encephalitis outbreak.if you were to get your news by just following modi on his social media accounts  you would have no clue that one of india s worst health crisis in some years has been unfolding over the past week.certainly  modi sent health minister harsh vardhan to muzaffarpur on    june  after which nda partner and bihar chief minister nitish kumar also visited the hospital where children have been dying. irate parents have called for kumar to resign.but we still don t know what modi s plans are. whether he has given orders to the union health ministry   which has  in the last few days  formed a committee to inquire into the reasons of the outbreak   on how to control it  whether someone has spoken to the world health organisation or whether he has called nitish kumar asking about the situation.what is this terrible  horrible silence in muzaffarpur that has got everyone so badly tongue tied  including the prime minister also read  yogi s up govt has some tips for nitish kumar on tackling encephalitisis this about politics  the fact that nitish kumar is in coalition with the bjp and that it is anathema to publicly criticise your own  is this because the mp from muzaffarpur  ajay nishad  is from the bjp and because he won a closely fought election  he cannot be taken to task by the bjp here s more. ajay nishad has not rushed back to his constituency where children have continued to fall ill all through the week  but remained in delhi. as he told ani   it is to be seen how the number of deaths be brought down to zero. i believe that we should concentrate and work on  g   gaon  garmi  gareebi and gandgi  village  heat  poverty  dirt . this disease  acute encephalitis syndrome  is somewhere connected to these factors. it seems as if nishad knows pm modi likes acronyms  because they make complex and wordy ideas simple. certainly  the muzaffarpur mp is a good student.one must now ask what the pm thinks of him and his continued absence from his own constituency  if governance is going to be modi s byword this term  perhaps he should begin with muzaffarpur. the people who have brought him to power on such a huge mandate   and some of whose children are now dying because of  g reasons   expect nothing else.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




himalayan cities are looking like garbage dumps with sewage rivers. modi govt must step in
text size  a  a the states of india that share the himalayas are also its principal sentinels. their governments need to recognise the vulnerabilities of this ecologically fragile region  and not only its rich natural resources and tourism potential.narendra modi government must prioritise safeguarding the himalayas in its second term. while a number of long term measures are included as part of the national action plan on climate change        several key and urgent interventions are vital to prevent further degradation of the himalayan ecology.also read  uttarakhand could see catastrophic floods if global warming targets are not metsustainable urbanisation in mountainsthe cities in the himalayan mountainous zones are increasing in size and number. they exhibit the same degradation that plagues cities in the plains  growing dumps of garbage and plastic  untreated sewerage  chronic water shortages  unplanned urban growth  and heavy pollution from increasing vehicular traffic. these need immediate interventions. i  town planningit is imperative to halt the unplanned growth of new settlements. instead  there should be consolidation of existing urban settlements to be governed through land use planning incorporated in a municipal master plan. state authorities will prescribe regulations taking into account the particularities of the local ecosystem  including seismic vulnerability and optimum population load.twelve himalayan towns included in the jawaharlal nehru national urban renewal mission  jnnurm  could serve as models in this regard.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfurther action points may include  a  amending municipal by laws to prohibit construction activity in areas falling in hazard zones or across alignments of natural springs  water sources and watersheds. b  revising the national building code to take into account the specific requirements of urban settlements in the himalayan zone  including recommendations to use local materials and architectural practices. c  setting up state level urban arts councils  under relevant legislation  to oversee the implementation of the national building code. d  incorporating compulsory use of solar water heaters  rainwater harvesting and appropriate sanitation facilities in the national building code and municipal by laws. e  prohibiting construction activity in catchment areas of cities  including along mountain lakes and other water bodies  and their feeder channels.also read  too far gone  even if we meet paris target  hindu kush himalayas will lose    rd glaciers ii  solid waste management a  the use of plastic bags should be banned in all hill towns and villages. this has been done with commendable success in the states of himachal pradesh and sikkim. b  potable local water  certified by a designated state authority  may be provided through all commercial outlets. this would discourage the use of bottled water  which adds to plastic litter. this has been done successfully in leh. c  each state must establish facilities for the composting of biodegradable household waste and recycling  and reuse of other types of waste. this may be done through public private partnership wherever feasible. d  an appropriate state tax on all major commodities using plastic and or non biodegradable packaging that enter hill towns must be explored.also read  liquor bottles   food cans among        kg of trash found on mt everestpromotion of sustainable pilgrimagethe himalayas are dotted with several sacred sites and pilgrimage spots. healthy and sustainable development and tourism should be promoted in these. i  a comprehensive inventory of key pilgrimage sites in each state must be drawn up  including analyses of the ecological capacity of each site. it should be carried out by multidisciplinary teams including engineers  scientists  ecologists  cultural anthropologists and ngos. ii  seeing the results of the above exercise  a plan must be developed to harmonise the inflow of pilgrims with the local environment s capacity to cater to the needs of pilgrims. restrictions can also be put on the months of the year when these sites would remain open. uttarakhand  for instance  has recently issued guidelines restricting the daily number of pilgrims to the gangotri glacier to    . iii  the construction of roads should be prohibited beyond at least    km from protected pilgrim sites  thereby creating a much needed ecological and spiritual buffer zone. d  each designated pilgrimage site should have a declared buffer zone where development activity will be carefully regulated. e  at all entry points to designated buffer zones  pilgrims will be advised to take back all waste  in particular non degradable items.also read  everest tourism is causing a mountain of problems every yearcommercial and adventure tourismthe measures listed for regulation of pilgrim traffic in the himalayan zone would also apply to the promotion of ecologically sustainable tourism in the himalayan region as a whole. the following interventions should also be considered  i  homestay tourism could be promoted in this area and commercial hotel tourism of the three  to five star variety discouraged or prohibited. ladakh is a good example of this. ii  each state will set up a homestay tourism audit and certification agency to promote standardisation and quality practices in designated tourism zones. iii  recognising the adverse impact on himalayan ecology of unrestrained expansion in vehicular traffic  each state should impose an entry tax for vehicles entering important hill towns. iv  parking fees for private vehicles in hill markets and hill towns need to be raised substantially to discourage such traffic  thereby reducing both congestion and pollution.also read  india can t commit to climate change abroad and be non compliant on environment at homegreen road constructionroads are the lifeline of the himalayan region. here are a few guidelines for road construction in hill areas. i  environmental impact assessment should be made mandatory for the construction of all state and national highways  and expressways of more than   km length  including in the extension and widening of existing roads. ii  road construction must provide for the treatment of hill slope instabilities resulting from road cutting  cross drainage works and culverts  using bio engineering and other technologies. iii  plans for road construction must provide for disposal of debris from construction sites at suitable and identified locations. iv  hot mix plants must only be set up at least   km away from settlements and in areas already devoid of vegetation. v  all hill roads must provide adequate roadside drains and  wherever possible  be connected to the natural drainage system of the area. vi  alignment of proposed roads should avoid fault zones and historically landslide prone zones.water securitythe importance of the himalayas as a natural storehouse and source of water must be acknowledged fully. the region is already under water stress. state governments need to take urgent measures. a  each himalayan state must initiate a state wide programme for rejuvenation of himalayan springs and protection of high altitude lakes. b  the government must provide legislative protection for mountain lakes  natural springs and key water sources  and prohibit construction activities along these water bodies. c  relevant bodies should inventorise mountain springs  active and dormant  and carry out detailed geological mapping to identify spring recharge zones.also read  environment is the most under reported disaster of narendra modi governmentbuilding environmental awarenesscentral and state governments must together organise an annual festival of the himalayas to celebrate local cultures  which demonstrate ways of sustainable living for resilient societies.a national endeavourit is necessary to initiate and develop a truly national endeavour to safeguard the pristine ecology of the himalayas. a coordinated approach between the union and state governments in the himalayan states is imperative. it is in this spirit that prime minister narendra modi should convene a meeting of the chief ministers of the himalayan states. the deliberations at the meeting  and the adoption of certain urgent and specific guidelines and decisions  would be the first step in formulating an ambitious national mission for sustaining the himalayan ecosystem. the prime minister and the chief ministers should meet annually to monitor progress and safeguard the himalayas.the author is a former foreign secretary and is currently senior fellow  cpr.this is the seventeenth in a series of articles titled  policy challenges            under theprint centre for policy research  cpr  collaboration. a longer version of this piece is available on the cpr website at www.cprindia.org. the full policy document on a range of issues addressed in this series is available on cpr s website.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




opposition is feeble. modi   bjp will have to walk the extra mile to keep it alive
prime minister narendra modi showed magnanimity when he assured the opposition this week that their views will be heard and given equal importance in the lok sabha  no matter the number of seats they won. then he held a meeting with opposition leaders to discuss the issue of simultaneous elections. it shows that modi  in his second term  understands the value of opposing ideas in a democracy and is ready to go out of his way to accommodate them. the prime minister has made his move. it s time for the opposition to pick up the gauntlet and uphold democracy. in his characteristic style  modi mentioned three words that sum up the attitude of the bjp towards this feeble opposition in the new lok sabha   when we come to parliament  we should forget paksh  treasury  and vipaksh  opposition . we should think about issues with a nishpaksh  impartial  spirit and work in the larger interest of the nation.  the grand opposition s grand failure the grand failure of the congress in the elections has led to a very strange situation in the lok sabha. the party has not only been limited to just    seats  there are now very few strong  opposing voices in parliament. the absence of an effective opposition is on everyone s minds  including modi s. beyond small numbers  the opposition is also characterised by the total lack of leadership qualities or urge to fight back with vigour. rahul gandhi  no matter what the congress may claim  insists on giving up his mantle. during the joint session of parliament thursday  he was seen browsing his phone during president ramnath kovind s speech  which can only be interpreted as indifference. the congress is in a dilemma   to participate in democratic exercises or look for a new president  and whether the new president should be from the nehru gandhi dynasty or not . last year  things didn t appear to be so gloomy for the congress. it defeated the bjp in three crucial state assembly elections in rajastha n  karnataka and madhya pradesh  and hopes were high on its performance improving. but in a series of setbacks   from loss of strategic coalitions to failing to capture the national narrative   the congress lost the plot. it had to make way for the bjp not only its own strongholds but even in states where the bjp was weak. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now the mahagathbandhan was cobbled together   something that sprouts every lok sabha election   but it clearly failed and by april  the congress was struggling to find a voice. it was sheer luck or rather the force of circumstances that the congress had accepted the munificence of the dmk in tamil nadu  and won eight out of the nine seats it contested. but for this  the party s strength in the lok sabha would have remained more or less the same as it was in     . also read  rahul gandhi says he s not involved in the process to pick new congress chief opposition in parliament the dance of democracy requires an opposition.issues such as  one country  one election  and the women s reservation bill need deeper deliberations and inputs from the opposition. in the past  the lok sabha has witnessed spirited debates on issues such as the new land acquisition bill  introduced in       which could not be passed in the rajya sabha due to united opposition.during the upa regime  the contentious communal violence bill was opposed tooth and nail by then opposition forcing the government to discard it. the triple talaq bill had to pass through the fine comb of the opposition during modi s first term. a serious and alert opposition can keep the ruling party in check  become the voice of the underrepresented and  in turn  strengthen the democratic process.also read  in photos  some opposition leaders gave pm modi s all party meet a miss   others attendedruling without an oppositionnow  with the elections done and dusted  the asymmetry in parliament looks even more glaring. the few opposition parties that will be in the lok sabha lack strong ideological moorings. but that is the general state of indian politics. many politicians even joined the bjp around the elections  proving that ideological gymnastics is no problem in today s india.except for the communist parties  now in a highly endangered state  no other party has had a consistent and ideological stand against the bjp  however wrong and unpopular.the onus of taking the opposition along now rests squarely on the shoulders of the bjp  and more importantly on prime minister modi himself. it may be tempting for the bjp to roll out the red carpet for fence sitters and weaken the already slender opposition  but that will add no value either to the ruling party or to democracy.most of the decisions on bills are made in the committees under the relevant ministries  which have representatives from every political party. it is here that the opposition could play a much greater role and do their homework diligently.finally  not inside parliament alone  but a larger role awaits the opposition outside of the two houses  among the people where their credibility will be put to test.the author is former editor of  organiser . views are personal.also read  numbers don t matter  we ll give tough time to modi govt in parliament  opposition sayssubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india is dripping with sugar but not enough buyers. modi govt needs to solve the glut
india s sugar output is likely to shrink to a three year low due to lower production in maharashtra and elsewhere  and that  in turn  will provide support to sugar prices. it will be of some help to cash strapped mills struggling to clear off the whopping   .   billion of cane dues owed to the farmers. but this will be temporary relief at best.the problem of sugar glut is not going away any time soon simply because the supply far exceeds the demand  and exports invariably fall short of the targets because indian sugar is expensive due to costly cane   the raw material   which leads to unsold inventories and unpaid dues to the growers.to help financially stressed sugar mills  the narendra modi government has taken a series of measures like creating a three million tonne buffer stock  and providing soft loans to enhance ethanol capacities. the import duty has been raised to a whopping     per cent  export duty has been scrapped  and a modest subsidy is on offer to push export and somehow help dispose off the extra sugar that india doesn t need. yet  mills are sitting on huge unsold  sugar  stocks worth     billion or so  according to indian sugar mills association  isma .it is obvious the modi government s measures are not working. due to uneconomic pricing of cane  sugar mills are bleeding  yet the cane growers   the intended beneficiaries   are not happy because they are not being paid on time. india needs nothing short of a complete overhaul of its regulatory regime to make its sugar industry financially robust and compete successfully in both domestic and overseas markets.over the years  successive governments  half hearted attempts at deregulating the prices of sugar and its by products  while retaining complete control over cane pricing  have ruined the financials of mills  resulting in mounting arrears to the farmers. yet  the ad hoc approach to policy making   guided by electoral math  the fate of as many as    lok sabha mps is tied to cane growing voters spread over uttar pradesh  maharashtra  karnataka  tamil nadu among others    continues  resulting in frequent demands for bailout by both sugar mills and cane farmers.also read  why sugarcane farmers in maharashtra are up in arms against mill ownersto deal with the present sugar glut  the bjp government s latest move to hike floor prices of sugar by rs   to rs    per kg  with possible revisions  won t be enough given the subdued demand condition and over supplied markets. besides  raising floor price will make indian sugar more un competitive and dampen export prospects. the current bjp government could come up with non inflationary ways to help farmers without the need for populist hikes  which invariably encourage cultivation of water intensive cane crop in water deficit regions like maharashtra.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe move to raise ethanol s regulated price by    per cent and offer subsidised loans are well intentioned but carry two major flaws. first  they will not help in dealing with cane and sugar over production in the short run. second  the measures  success will depend upon continuance of high crude oil prices to keep oil marketing companies interested in blending ethanol with petrol. that s not certain.if crude oil prices fall sharply  oil marketing companies will be less interested in blending unless the government prunes down ethanol prices  which the sugar mills will resist.therefore  prodded by the incentive of regularly hiked cane prices  if the farmers continue to over produce cane and the mills do so ethanol  and if the government doesn t cut ethanol prices when the crude prices fall  two things will happen   either the oil marketing companies will reduce blending  which will make these new ethanol production capacities redundant  or they will incur losses. neither of this situation is desirable but that s where the central government s policies on ethanol are heading.also read  sugar output seen sinking to   year low next seasonthe flawed cane pricingit s populism rather than smart economics that guides the fixation of cane prices in india. in contrast  the price of output   sugar and molasses   are determined by market forces. moreover  the price of ethanol  another by product  is fixed by the government. this regulatory hotchpotch has been at the root of india s sugar mess.yet  successive indian governments have been raising cane prices irrespective of the deficit or surplus in sugar output  with no reference to prevailing sugar prices. as a result  the fair and remunerative price  frp  of cane fixed by the centre has more than doubled in the last nine years from rs     per quintal to rs     per quintal. the state governments  in particular of uttar pradesh   india s largest cane and sugar producing state   further raised its state advised price  sap  for cane to rs     per quintal in october      while ignoring the centre s advice to follow the frp.the hikes in cane prices   now a matter of wto dispute   maybe favourable to farmers  but they encourage over production of cane  which the mills are mandated to buy. this erodes their margins and results in piling up of cane arrears  especially in times of surplus production that pushes sugar prices down. unfriendly regulations for production and inter state movement of by products such as molasses add to the problem.market distortion doesn t end with cane or its by products. india s jute packaging materials act       warrants that    per cent of the total sugar output be packed in jute bags that are three times costlier than polythene bags  and prone to bacterial contamination often leading to rejection of consignments by bulk buyers such as beverage makers  confectioners and pharmaceutical companies   which together account for    per cent of india s sugar sales by value.also read  global sugar market has hit a sweet spot but is worried india could turn it bitterthe way forwardin order to put an end to india s sugar mess on a sustainable basis  linking cane prices with those of sugar and its by products are urgently called for. this will also help make indian sugar price competitive enough to withstand competition both in export and domestic market without the need for government intervention.to deal with farmers  opposition when cane prices are lowered in line with falling sugar prices  the modi government may consider compensating the farmers directly on the basis of how much cane they have supplied to the sugar mills. raising productivity and sugar recovery rates are other non inflationary ways to help farmers without going for populist hikes in cane prices. india badly needs a gutsy leadership to resolve the regulatory mess created over the years to tame its sugar glut. unfortunately  that s not forthcoming.the author is co founder  director and head of agricultural and food at indonomics consulting  a policy research  advisory and advocacy startup. she also tracks india s cane and milling sector for the client sugaronline. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




business as usual will not allow india to meet modi s    trillion gdp target by     
text size  a  a a few days ago  when talking to an the assembled chief ministers of india s states  prime minister narendra modi declared that he wanted india to be a     trillion economy  by       when he once again faces reelection. this would  he said  be  challenging  but achievable. modi could never be accused of lacking ambition  but the fact is that getting india s gdp to    trillion in five years will be far more challenging than achievable. india is  currently  a   .  trillion dollar economy  to reach the    trillion mark by       the economy would have to grow at over     a year. to put this in context  in the last quarter for which data is available  india grew at slower than      and  if you believe the modi government s own former top economist  that data is flawed and india may well be growing a few percentage points less than that.india could and should aspire to double digit growth. without sustained growth at that level it has little hope of employing the roughly one million young people who join its workforce every month. and unless it takes advantage of its current  favorable demographics it is never likely to emerge as an upper middle income economy with a prosperous and thriving middle class.but the prerequisites for the kind of growth that transformed the fortunes of the asian tigers and then china have not yet been put into place. supportive markets for land and labor simply do not exist. energy supply and infrastructure are far better than they were  but still not up to the standards required to build a world class manufacturing sector. and although successive governments have paid lip service to the need to educate young indians and provide them with the vocational skills they need to succeed in a modern economy  the outcomes of various attempts to do so have been frankly disappointing.if india does very little   a  business as usual  scenario   it will  indeed  continue to grow. growth will be moderate by indian standards   between    to    on average  and more often around   . if it does in fact grow at    a year  then the indian economy will hit    trillion in output a decade from now  twice the time that modi wants.it will also be a very different economy   and country   from others of that size. the india of       if it is still growing at     will be vastly unequal not just in terms of personal income and wealth  but between regions. some parts of india   the southern peninsula  the national capital of delhi  and the coastal regions of gujarat and maharashtra   may by then have achieved relatively well off  middle income status.but the vast hinterland of india   which is also  incidentally  where population growth is highest   will remain poor. these are the areas that have  for the past two general elections  determined the composition and orientation of india s national government. their power within indian politics will only grow  and india s behavior toward the rest of the world will reflect their attitudes and priorities.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe noweven today  parts of india look like southeast asia and other parts like sub saharan africa. that difference will intensify in the absence of double digit growth. the centrifugal forces this will set off   already visible in indian politics   may be severely destabilizing.nor will this india have the kind of state that is generally associated with large and dynamic economies. the indian state today remains under resourced and under powered. it is set up more for a large agrarian economy than it is for global production or sophisticated manufacturing. it struggles to implement large scale infrastructure projects or to regulate complex sectors independently and transparently. nor will it have the money for a defense sector in keeping with indians  high expectations  or the world s.how will the world deal with a country that has the aggregate size  and the aspirations  of a putative superpower but whose politics  state and capabilities have remained relatively unchanged  it will not be easy. other countries have graduated  one way or another  from developing country status. what happens when india becomes one of the three or four largest economies in the world in dollar terms  but retains the attitudes and requirements of a developing country the rest of the world had better hope that modi s ambitions of high growth are fulfilled. that will mean that india has carried out the crucial internal reforms that will allow it to be a productive international player  and to take on the leadership roles that so many people across the world hope that it will. but the chances of that happening at the moment are sadly low.also read   spurious criticism    pm s economic council rebuts arvind subramanian s gdp claimsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




here s what modi govt must do when  g arrives  give spectrum free to jio  airtel   others
 india is almost always too late to join the technology party  missing out on early action when most of the fortunes are being cashed upon. against the      billion that  g added to the world s gdp  the  g spectrum is expected to add more than      billion to the world s gdp over the next five to    years. india was late into  g  g space in actual commercial deployment.can india break into the  g party at an early stage when applications  or apps  are still on the drawing boards and premium pricing prevails  here we examine some policy choices before the narendra modi government  which can enable and incentivise india s telecom companies and technology giants to capture premium markets in the  g space.if india takes the traditional route of identifying available markets  looking at the demand parameters  and then organising the auction of spectrum to telecom companies  it will be years before we have  g services on the scale  spread and intensity required for the technology to make any impact on india s gdp and export markets. we will thus end up as a country with a large userbase of  g services but a small player in driving the technology and its application space globally.also read  india s  g shift   digital village plan have hit a hurdle  telecom sector s rs  .  trillion debtfor india to become early adopters and early movers in  g space  we propose that the modi government  along with the telecom companies  technology industry and other stakeholders consider giving spectrum for free to existing  well established telecom players like jio  airtel  vodafone  bsnl among others in    big cities in proportion to their existing market share in each city. spectrum for  g in other cities and towns should be allocated the usual way depending on existing or new players.the    top cities could be identified by the telecom players  technology companies and the centre. the spectrum initially given away should at least be equal to the existing  g spectrum in each city. services to be offered should not be constrained by availability of spectrum. thereafter  telecom and technology companies should be left free to determine how to exploit the opportunity for india s benefit and export markets.the telecom industry today is in doldrums  with huge debts to banks that are barely being serviced. it lacks capital to invest on the scale required in  g. left to itself  the telecom industry will take years to come up with the capital required to make the necessary investment to exploit  g opportunity to the fullest. giving existing players startup spectrum free of cost will incentivise them to not only make such investments  but also capture an early share of the application space  which is expected to be several times that of the  g space. we may note here that  g will have far more industrial applications since various devices are connected to the internet and to each other. so  the apps space will be dominated by the same customers that the existing technology giants have. early entry into  g will give them and the telecom companies a welcome boost. it will of course help digitise india and indian consumers faster as well.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  rbi s ban on bitcoins puts regulators  accountability back under judicial scrutinythe modi government won t face any real loss by giving away the startup spectrum to telecom companies for free. the money forgone upfront will eventually show up through the profits made by the telecom companies  and the government can capture the required revenue stream by taxing services   certain percentage of sales plus the usual income tax. in a way  the modi government would merely postpone the revenue collection from upfront to after the telecom players have started generating profits. in the process  this would strengthen the fragile balance sheet of existing players who owe tonnes of money to banks  which in turn don t have the capital to lend money to the industry. the government  and thereby india  can sidestep this vicious and debilitating debt trap with its free  g spectrum.the proposal also meets the test of fairness. the auctions of  g and  g spectrums were gamed by players with enormous losses to themselves and the consumers at large. in the process  a lot of bad debt was inflicted on the banking system. so  this proposal is also motivated by the need to reset the entire telecom and technology space  put things back in order  clean up the bad debts  and restore profitability to existing players. no new player should eligible for free startup spectrum either. so  the political mess that characterised  g auctions will not be repeated. furthermore  allocation of spectrum within the selected    cities should be strictly according to existing market share. this eliminates favouritism.lastly  the startup spectrum should be free to use for five years with a bonus provision of extension by another five years  provided the spectrum is fully exploited by the telecom player. this will cut out any incentive in cornering the spectrum and keeping it unused. it will also help ensure that the required investments are made at the earliest to take maximum advantage of the free spectrum. after    years  the spectrum should be allocated the usual way.also read  talkpoint  with the worst  g speed in the world  is india just chasing headlines on digital economy it is time to alter our traditional approach to technology as a late stage adopter. this approach not only delays benefits but also prevents full exploitation of assets created due to early obsolescence. in fact  by the time a new technology is fully deployed in india  the world is ready to move on to the next. early adoption not only helps the consumers  telecom companies and the industry  but also holds possibilities of opening the route to master the innards of  g technology by india s technology players. this makes for safer deployment of  g technology from the security point of view. but more than anything else  it enables our technology giants to enter into the hands on application space very early  and capture the industrial markets unique to the  g space. surely the modi government can afford to take a few risks  postpone revenue collection for a few years for such overwhelming advantage to india s technology industry it is time to break the old moulds and capture new markets.sonali ranade tweets  sonaliranade. sheilja sharma tweets  arguingindian. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




sandwiched between xi  putin  imran in bishkek  modi learnt an important political lesson
russian president vladimir putin is believed to have persuaded pakistan prime minister imran khan to reciprocate prime minister narendra modi s handshake in bishkek last week on the sidelines of the shanghai cooperation organisation  sco  summit.according to pakistani sources  khan was   predictably   quite upset that modi didn t fly over pakistani airspace to reach bishkek after asking the pakistanis permission for the same  which was given. in fact  khan also wrote three letters to modi in the run up to bishkek  offering the hand of peace.after all  how many times can a man say hello to you as you turn your face away also read  pms modi  imran khan exchange pleasantries in bishkekmodi will definitely have to find a way to climb down from his balakot angst. there is no easy way to deal with pakistan s policy of undermining india through cross border terrorism.this is why modi will always have bishkek. it is here  last week  that the veils finally fell from modi s eyes. india may be a rising power  which the world cannot ignore  but it was in bishkek that modi realised that in the quicksand of international politics  there are no rules. no permanent friends  enemies or acquaintances. only plain and brutal national interest  sometimes enveloped in a bear hug  other times wreathed in smiles.that s why a video from bishkek doing the rounds is important. it shows russian president vladimir putin and imran khan in animated conversation at the sco summit dinner  while modi  sandwiched between afghan president ashraf ghani and kazakh president kassym jomart tokayev  looks straight ahead.  chinese president xi jinping is sitting on tokayev s other side . at least in this video  and on this side of the table  there s no conversation at all.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowdid modi wonder what putin and imran khan were up to  speculation has been rife for some time that islamabad wants to buy russian arms  although moscow has told delhi this is just to fight terror operations. nevertheless  what was putin  who has more than once clasped modi warmly in his embrace  doing with india s main enemy  pakistan the importance of bishkek is that modi  who has been lucky so far because he has had to deal with an enervated rahul gandhi as his main opposition  must realise that international politics gives you no room to grandstand.also read  modi s bishkek message to imran khan   forget talks until you end terrorismif he has read his history  from chanakya to the treaty of versailles  modi must realise that nations  especially when they are down and out  must be allowed to save face.even when nations lose the world cup  have to go with begging bowls to the imf adb world bank and are constantly threatened with being put on the financial action task force  fatf  list  they must be allowed to survive.iran is a good example. on the fatf blacklist and once again in the crosshairs of the us sanctions  iran keeps going  one step after another. its latest weapon to deflect the oil sanctions is to call upon its old friends  the russians  to invite taliban leader mullah baradar to his first foreign visit outside pakistan  to moscow   incidentally  on    may  two days before modi was sworn in again as prime minister.mullah baradar spurned the us negotiator on the afghan talks  zalmay khalilzad  and went to moscow   no doubt  on the telling of the pakistani generals. in one fell swoop  russia had reinserted itself into a dialogue that the americans have been trying  for years and years  to broker.in bishkek  modi is believed to have walked up to imran khan   the foreign office establishments have different stories to tell their respective media  of course   upon which both shook hands and proceeded to have a brief chat in a room that appeared round the corner just at that very instant  whereupon they discussed a few things  including the hurly burly of the indian elections.also read  india can get a lot out of bishkek   if pm modi can remember lessons china taught nehruclearly  the very carefully orchestrated messaging by both new delhi and islamabad is to ensure two things  in india  modi must find a way to climb down so he can tell his own  karyakartas  and favourable media why he is now talking to a country he called the enemy during the recent elections.in pakistan  too  a carefully affronted establishment must also tell its own favourable media why and how the dialogue with india can  will and must soon begin.this is how the story goes in islamabad  putin persuaded imran khan to reciprocate modi s handshake. khan  who is wooing putin these days  said yes.putin  whose russia has fallen from great power status to a middle income country  knows what it means to never say no. in dushanbe  one day after bishkek  putin gifted xi jinping a box of russian ice cream for his   th birthday  while xi told russian news agency tass that putin is his  best and bosom friend. also read  from principles to pragmatism  five ways modi has changed india s foreign policycertainly  modi wouldn t like putin being chummy with either imran khan or xi jinping   both pakistan and china are india s enemies  remember that s why modi will   or must   always remember bishkek. it was here  in this small central asian town  that illusion gave way to pragmatism. it is here that the veils fell. as he smiled sweetly at imran khan   who was seen cosying up to putin  modi s best friend   modi probably realised that the world is a really tough place.perhaps the pm has gotten used to dealing with a weak opposition that can t even put together a leader in the lok sabha. but putin  xi  imran khan and his generals or donald trump   who modi meets later this month in osaka   are cut from a different cloth. clearly  modi has his foreign policy work cut out.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




defence university to defence chief   modi govt now has political capital for the big reforms
a a striking feature of the      lok sabha elections was the unusual prominence accorded to national security in the bharatiya janata party s campaign. in       the party s election manifesto discussed security policy  but only towards the end. by contrast  the      manifesto began with national security. political scientists will debate the extent to which these issues shaped voters  preferences  but the narendra modi government now has enormous political capital to bring about far reaching reforms in defence   reforms that cannot be put off.indeed  the modi government faces a string of daunting challenges from reforming the security architecture and structuring the armed forces to strengthening the defence industrial base and military readiness. rhetorical fixes and institutional band aids can no longer help.need for a chief of defence stafflet s start with issues that are well recognised before considering those that have yet to register in policy debates. it is almost    years since the kargil review committee set out its recommendations for national security reforms recommendations that were broadly endorsed by a subsequent group of ministers and revisited by another committee in     . the most important yet thorny of these was creating the post of a chief of defence staff  cds  as a single point military adviser to the political leadership. the idea had met with resistance both from within the armed forces the air force was not keen and from political leaders that were averse to concentrating military authority in a single office.during prime minister narendra modi s first term in office  it appeared that these concerns had been smoothed over. in the summer of       then defence minister  the late manohar parrikar  publicly asserted that a  chief defence staff is a must  and that he would come up with a proposal within three months. three years on  parrikar was still hoping to get this done. the problem  he observed  lay in ensuring that the cds was linked with meaningful jointness among the three services.also read  for   years  modi put national security reforms on hold. now  he must act fastin fact  the importance of creating integrated theatre commands had been emphasised all along. as a starting point  it was felt that supply and logistics functions could be integrated. but the modi government failed to make any headway in the remainder of its tenure   partly owing to resistance from within the armed forces. it bears emphasising  however  that defence reforms of this scale have been pushed through in other democracies in the teeth of greater or lesser opposition from the military. even the choice of the first cds or equivalent has often been unpalatable to the services and their leadership. lord mountbatten was chosen as britain s first cds because he was equally detested by all the three services. it is time the government moved decisively to create a fully empowered cds with a clear road map for integration of commands.defence manufacturingthe strategic imperative of creating a solid defence industrial base is equally well recognised. here  too  the first modi government sounded the right notes. speaking at the aero india show in february       prime minister said that defence manufacturing was  at the heart of the  make in india  programme  and that the country should aim to manufacture    per cent of military equipment domestically in the next five years. by the end of the term  the proposed defence manufacturing ecosystem had  along with  make in india   slipped out of sight. the only thing the bjp s      manifesto could talk about was manufacturing of ak     rifles in amethi.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbut this is as good a time as any to revive and push ahead the plans for a defence manufacturing base that includes private sector as well as public sector undertakings. if there is one area where industrial policy can work  it is defence. emphasising this domain could fit well with the country s larger requirements of economic renewal.also read  modi govt must be cajoled  nudged   criticised into giving us a national security doctrinethe fiscal challengethe next priority for defence policy is to deal with the shrinking resources for military modernisation and the consequent need for structural change in the armed forces.following the grant of one rank one pension and the implementation of the  th pay commission  manpower costs of salary and pension now account for over    per cent of the defence budget. in the budget of          the allocation for pensions grew at    per cent over the previous year  while capital expenditure rose only by   per cent. given the real constraints on increasing the overall allocation for defence  capital expenditure for military modernisation is unlikely to increase in line with the requirements.this fiscal challenge  however  is also an opportunity to rethink the fundamental structure of our armed forces  especially the balance between long service and short service components as well as manpower and technology. the services are reportedly considering how to prune manpower  but this should be part of a broader exercise that ideally should be led by a cds.military education mustthis brings us to the last major challenge  military readiness. much of the discussion around this tends to focus on critical shortages of equipment and spares. but the real  long term problem lies in professional military education  especially for officers.our training establishments impart narrow professional skills. they focus on preparing officers to command companies  battalions and brigades  or perform staff duties at various levels. there is practically no attempt to give the officers a sense of the larger contexts   strategic  political and international   in which the armed forces function. it is only at the highest training establishment  the national defence college  that senior one star officers get exposed to some of these issues. this is too little and too late.also read  narendra modi govt wants a strong military  but its defence budget can t guarantee thatthis outmoded approach to training impacts the quality of human capital at all levels in the services. yet  no government has paid serious attention to this. the fate of the long heralded indian national defence university is symptomatic of the political leadership s neglect of this crucial area.the bjp s mandate gives the modi government an opportunity to place defence policy in the top tier of its priorities. it should seize this rare opportunity. the time for tarrying has passed.the author is professor of international relations and history at ashoka university and a senior fellow at carnegie india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india should abolish state governments since modi can run the country all by himself
a when the ruling bharatiya janata party lost its governments in rajasthan  madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh barely four months before the      lok sabha elections  prime minister narendra modi quietly stopped propagating his  one nation  one election  idea. now that he is back in power with    seats more than last time  the idea has returned as have his renewed attempts to push it through.the prime minister wants all state elections to be held along with the lok sabha elections. if his plan were to be implemented  there would be no assembly election across the country for the next five years.in       people will choose their mlas along with their mps  their chief ministers along with their prime minister. one nation  one election. if india is one  why should it have many elections one election is necessary in a country that is already united by one language  one religion  one enemy nation  one sport  one culture  one weather  one caste  one dress  one cuisine  one party and one leader. only the tukde tukde gang talks about diversity. if you want diversity  go to pakistan.also read  poll panel chief says modi s simultaneous polls desirable goal  but possible only in     prime minister modi says too much money is wasted in holding state and lok sabha elections separately. he is right. we could save around rs       crore every five years by organising state and lok sabha elections together. this money could be better utilised in building statues  such as the one in gujarat that cost around rs       crore. the savings could also help increase one leader s annual publicity budget  currently a modest rs       crore.it will of course cost more to put two instead of one electronic voting machines  but let s not allow logic and facts to come in the way of national unity. better still  we should save the money on the extra evm  making voters choose the cm and pm with just one press of a button. the mlas and the mps don t matter anyway. ours is already a presidential form of government like the united states. we should do one better than the us  because the vedas said we are the best  and completely do away with electing state governments altogether. let our presidential prime minister appoint chief ministers. in most states he already does. what makes you think the people of haryana chose manohar lal khattar  or the people of uttar pradesh chose yogi adityanath we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowit is time to improve upon the concept of  co operative federalism  and move on to  co opted federalism .also read  why bjp will rule india uninterrupted for the next    years  till     this federalism business is all hogwash. it creates a lot of problems. india has    states  and two of the seven union territories have their own assembly election. that s    assembly elections in five years   an average of one election every two months. is it fair to expect narendra modi and amit shah to keep fighting so many elections  how will they govern without populism if they are forced to pander to the masses all the time the prime minister rightly says the administration comes to a standstill when it s election time. he is right  when and how will the union government function if its entire focus is on winning state elections from puducherry to punjab besides  critics picking holes in modi s idea of simultaneous polls don t realise the amount of money and hard work it takes for the bjp to win these state elections. this is not sustainable. that s why these slip ups happen. modi shah lost delhi and bihar in     . they lost the hindi heartland states like madhya pradesh  chhattisgarh and rajasthan in     . they couldn t form the government in karnataka  and those greedy janata dal  secular  mlas are white elephants who don t like to trade like horses. and remember how gujarat s voters played hard to get in      also read  modi says debate on simultaneous polls is healthy sign of democracy   tribute to vajpayeewhen state and lok sabha elections are held together  these annoying local factors  these caste dynamics and farmers issues and so on  they will all go away. for  one nation  one election   there will be  one nation  one issue  and that one issue is narendra modi. forget your reservation issues and farm prices and bank credit and unemployment rate. the only issue in india is whether you like narendra modi or not. you don t have a choice because the alternative is rahul gandhi.in fact  now that modi is india and india is modi  we should ask if we need state governments at all. by giving narendra modi majority after majority  the people of india have signed away federalism  given up on diversity and local issues  and no longer care about caste and community representation. all because they know how well one leader is running the entire country single handedly. which is why we don t need state governments at all.  one nation  one election  should be followed by  one nation  one state .views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india s overworked doctors are trashed by all  patients  corporates   even pm modi
 as over     doctors resign and more go on strike in mamata banerjee s west bengal and other cities join in solidarity to protest patient attacks  i recall a conversation with a friend of mine who runs a small     bed hospital in one of india s largest cities. every now and then  his float glass fa ade is shattered. without a frown  he replaces the same  with new float glass. having seen this happen a few times  i asked him the silly question   why don t you replace the glass with an iron grill  wryly smiling he explained his crafty solution to a unique problem. each time a patient died  the irate attendants would gather  encouraged by a local politician  and throw stones at his facade. the cathartic sound of shattering glass would douse all anger and with a sense of achievement  the bereaved patients leave and the hapless doctors heave a sigh of relief.the vilification of doctors starts right at the top. prime minister narendra modi  in london last year  upset the entire doctor community by declaring that there is an unholy nexus between doctors and pharmaceutical majors. he went on to also state that doctors hoodwink anxious patients by selling them expensive stents. these comments by someone as senior as modi further vitiated an atmosphere where doctors and not the corporate owners of tertiary care hospitals found themselves facing the music as irate patients across the country vented their fury on whoever they could see in front of them.also read there is a law to protect doctors from assault but this is why it doesn t workthe problem with both the health and the education sector in india is a deep asymmetry of information. while customers buying consumer goods know enough about products or have several alternatives to choose from  students and patients are clueless and must depend on the ethics and values of their providers of service. this asymmetry and stray examples of abuse of this power have led to a wide sweeping generalisation on the moral turpitude within the health sector.the prime minister s statement was adding fuel to the fire that had been burning since a highly publicised case of one major hospital charging rs    lakh for a dengue patient who had died amidst claims of gross overbilling.the strike by doctors in kolkata that has now spread to many states brings up some very serious issues regarding the health sector in the country. the issue once again highlights the abysmal lack of clinical standards and a huge deficit in terms of human resources in state run hospitals. the clinical establishments act      that was passed more than a decade ago has not been implemented in any state. hospital associations have successfully ensured that the law is not implemented as according to them it is far too draconian  both by way of the penalties imposed and the price caps that it imposes. as a result  there is a widespread feeling that hospitals  particularly those run by corporate interests overcharge customers  even as they run on subsidised land made available by city planners and municipalities.doctors  on their part  complain that they are often underpaid even as they work round the clock given huge shortages of manpower  face angry customers and are abandoned by their owners and their management when things go sour. unlike in other countries  our doctors are not covered by comprehensive insurance policies that protect them against legal action and against malpractice suits. hospital managements complain that this kind of wanton vilification forces them to spend heavily on security  often hiring armed guards who must tackle mobs on a rampage. the police  which now runs an omnipolis helpline in cities like hyderabad  charges hospitals heavily for providing assistance during such emergencies.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  doctors blame staff shortage   poor infrastructure  not angry relatives for attacks on themnineteen states  including west bengal  have passed the protection of medicare service persons and medicare service institutions  prevention of violence and damage to property  act that protects doctors. but enforcement is poor because the act is not tagged to the indian penal code  ipc  and the code of criminal procedure  crpc .the situation is dire indeed. a much quoted lancet study shows that our doctor shortages are mind boggling. there is much regional variation   there is one government hospital bed for every     people in goa while there is only one for every       people in bihar. six out of    hospitals in our poor states do not provide intensive care and a fourth of them have abysmal sanitation and drainage facilities. the government s flagship program ayushman bharat suffers from this gross undersupply of doctors even as it increases demand substantially. till these concerns are addressed we will continue to have the kind of unfortunate flare ups we are seeing in kolkata.the author is a professor of health economics at the mcrhrdi  formerly with the gates foundation.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




indira gandhi to modi   india s secular democracy has been dying for a while now
text size  a  a narendra modi s emphatic re election victory makes inevitable something that was long feared  the transformation of india from secular democracy to hindu majoritarian state.far from helping to reverse the global tide of illiberal figures and movements  voters in the world s largest democracy have advanced it. modi won with a landslide despite having failed miserably in his central mission  to create jobs for india s young population.it also did not matter to his supporters that during his first five years in power india s social fabric was systematically shredded and the credibility of virtually every major institution  from the supreme court to india s statistical organizations and the media  was undermined. it seemed more important that modi could claim to have punished pakistan for its support of terrorism with air strikes deep into the country.also read  the bjp strategy that helped narendra modi march past    much will be written about how indians succumbed to a leader with a proven record of economic incompetence  social disunity and xenophobic nationalism. but those who express great shock over this moral and political calamity will be exposing their own intellectual naivete. the fact is that their understanding of democracy  especially its indian variant  has not kept up with reality.the great theorists of democracy  from tom paine to john stuart mill  insisted that democracy expresses the rational choices of its citizens. but india s experience tells us otherwise.fake news  hate speech and corporate money can easily compromise rational choices. the ostensibly benign rule of the majority can quickly degenerate into belligerent majoritarianism. and institutions  however unimpeachable  can be subverted by dedicated ideological cadres of the kind modi commands.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowcertainly  modi has amply clarified that while democracies may choose their rulers  they cannot dictate the sort of power their rulers wield   which may be as despotic and arbitrary as in an authoritarian state.many detractors of donald trump  modi  and other elected demagogues have set great store by democracy s impersonal institutions  and their checks and balances. but such faith was always a form of complacency at best  and blindness at worst.many unexamined platitudes about democracy derive from the cold war. the system obviously seemed ethically sound and politically efficient when compared to the authoritarian dictatorships  often communist  of asia  eastern europe and latin america.surrounded by despotisms  india  in particular  drew much political and moral prestige from its status as a democratic nation state. photographs of destitute indians lining up to vote symbolized their exceptional ability to change their rulers.the rapid rise of authoritarian china in the     s made democratic india look even more virtuous in contrast. in actuality  however  if we regard democracy as a promise of equality and dignity  underpinned by rule of law and impartial institutions  rather than just periodic elections  then democracy in india has been under continuous pressure and periodic assault.devising india s radically democratic constitution in the late     s  the dalit leader b.r. ambedkar was already pointing to a fatal contradiction   that though the principle of one man one vote seemed to confer political equality on indian citizens  it left untouched the grotesque social and economies inequalities of indian society.ambedkar s warning resonates even more after modi s victory   we must remove this contradiction at the earliest possible moment or else those who suffer from inequality will blow up the structure of political democracy. one clear sign of this innate precariousness of indian democracy was the  emergency  in the mid     s. faced with mass agitation against her  prime minister indira gandhi suspended fundamental rights and detained opposition leaders and critics. the media surrendered to her as cravenly as it has to modi.also read  this is what changed for voters from      to      lok sabha elections  nothingconventional accounts of the emergency have a happy ending  mrs. gandhi lost elections in      and indian democracy was vindicated. but her spell of authoritarian rule responded to a fundamental crisis resulting from the unfulfilled promises of indian democracy. with india s cruel inequalities intensifying  as they have in recent years  authoritarianism was always likely to become the rule rather than an exception.it is also worth remembering today that hindu majoritarianism  another expedient of a cynical ruling class  was originally forged by india s avowedly secular rulers. mrs. gandhi and her son rajiv  prime minister from      to       unleashed it in india long before anyone had heard of modi.secular as well as hindu nationalist governments presided from the late     s onwards over a brutal counter insurgency in kashmir  which helped corrode many indian institutions   from the judiciary to the media and the military   while mainstreaming anti muslim sentiment in indian politics and society.modi has undoubtedly accelerated the decay of india s political and civil life. but any honest reckoning with india s election results must begin with this admission  the country s secular democracy was dying well before modi gave it a terminal blow.pankaj mishra is a renowned author. his books include  age of anger  a history of the present    from the ruins of empire  the intellectuals who remade asia   and  temptations of the west  how to be modern in india  pakistan  tibet and beyond. subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




smriti irani s makeover  from being most disliked modi minister to dynasty slayer in amethi
text size  a  a defeating one of the gandhis in their family stronghold is no mean feat and smriti irani has perhaps ensured that her unpleasant stint during prime minister narendra modi s first tenure is overshadowed by thursday s electoral punch.for now  at least  smriti irani  the soon to be amethi mp  has put her naysayers on the backfoot. but most importantly  she has made it difficult for modi and bjp president amit shah to ignore her  may have even made it incumbent on them to reward her with a plum post after modi next takes the oath as the prime minister and picks his ministry.for someone who spent a rather inglorious five years as a union minister  twice getting shunted out of high profile ministries  smriti irani s victory was justifiably the biggest upset of the      lok sabha elections. so even as thursday s verdict remained all about modi s spectacular show  smriti irani managed to create a space for herself by achieving what she did defeating congress president rahul gandhi in his bastion amethi by a neat margin of        votes.of course  rahul gandhi s deep unpopularity went a long way in aiding the feisty leader s win. perhaps he saw the writing on the wall  choosing to also contest from wayanad in kerala as a back up. and if he did indeed  then part of that writing may have already been written in the previous lok sabha elections  when smriti irani s spirited fight against the nehru gandhi scion had brought his margin of victory down from well over three lakh votes in      to a little over one lakh in     .still  a victory was considered highly unlikely and one that many had thought was simply impossible. and so  maybe just for that  smriti irani s dizzying moment in      is an emphatic repudiation of her image of a political oddity who defeated all the odds on her path to victory.also read  smriti irani must know india is at a tipping point and women aren t seeking permissionthe early years  the risesmriti irani  a former miss india contestant and a superstar in her own right on indian television  joined the bjp in     . her political career didn t start off on a pleasant note  bringing defeat from chandni chowk against congress leader kapil sibal in the      lok sabha elections.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthat was only the beginning as smriti irani would go on to become a public baiter of narendra modi  giving remarks in the media against him over the      post godhra riots and holding him responsible for the bjp s defeat in the elections. if that wasn t enough  smriti irani would even threaten to sit on a fast unto death later that year with the sole demand that narendra modi resign from his post of chief minister in gujarat.but politics  as they say  is as unpredictable as it can be. equations changed and within a few years  smriti irani emerged as one of modi s trusted lieutenants. rising up the ranks   from taking the national president s role of the bjp s women wing to becoming a rajya sabha mp from gujarat   it was a steep climb for her.the turning point  however  was the      lok sabha election  when smriti irani showed the grit to take on the giant gandhi in his stronghold. although she lost  her fight was rewarded handsomely by getting her the plum post of human resource development minister once the modi government took charge.also read  smriti irani may rage on twitter  but she s always relaxed on instagramthe fall  the controversiesjust like her rise  smriti irani s decline was equally sudden. her five years in the union minister s role can at best be described as chequered and tumultuous.she may have been given the very crucial hrd ministry  but in no time did she manage to emerge as among the most controversial  disliked and difficult ministers in recent times. be it her lack of competence in the role  the furore surrounding her fake degree  her flippant  i went to yale  comment  or her sheer high handedness as the minister  nothing worked in her favour.smriti irani ensured the hrd ministry was dragged into the front pages of newspapers more frequently than ever before   not because of policy decisions  but controversies. from making sanskrit compulsory as the third language in kendriya vidyalayas and ordering schools to observe    december as  good governance day  to her handling of the rohit vemula controversy and top academicians leaving their posts citing her as the cause   the mercurial minister rubbed many in the government and bureaucracy the wrong way.it was a controversial stint  to say the least  and murmurs of her throwing files at senior civil servants besides asking the junior ones to keep an eye on journalists entering the ministry in shastri bhavan  began doing the rounds. many questioned her habit of taking decisions without consulting officials  or for relying only on her coterie  which included an officer on special duty sanjay kachroo  whose appointment had never  in fact  been cleared by the appointment committee of the cabinet .ias officers  mediapersons and even her own party members had a litany of complaints against her decisions and  imperious  behaviour. the bad press forced the bjp s top brass to reconsider its decision and smriti irani was divested of the portfolio in mid      and given the far less important textiles ministry instead.also read  smriti irani  one of team modi s key ministers has also been among its most controversiala year later  in the middle of       smriti irani was rehabilitated and nobody quite knows why. she was given the important information and broadcasting ministry but soon enough  troubles began to surface there as well. a series of unsavoury events followed but it was the public humiliation for the president s office over the national film awards ceremony caused by her ministry s mismanagement that compelled pm modi to drop her within a year  getting her deputy minister rajyavardhan rathore to replace her instead. two key portfolios snatched away within four years was seen as a public acknowledgement by smriti irani s party of a lack of faith in her.it would hardly be an exaggeration to say smriti irani became the most talked about and written about minister during the first term of the modi regime.the electoral punchirani had her eyes set on amethi ever since      and had visited the constituency as many as    times in five years   a glaring contrast from rahul gandhi s rare and fleeting appearances.she nurtured the seat and fought a combative battle  eventually managing the big upset in      elections.but while smriti irani may have managed to push modi and amit shah to do a rethink on her  the trick  however  would lie in how she traverses through the next five years and whether she can really leave her prone to controversy side behind.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




verdict       modi ji is now india s modi xi
text size  a  a the bharatiya janata party has won a spectacular victory in the parliamentary elections with prime minister narendra modi sweeping the polls. the huge tally notched up by the bjp  well above its      score  and the surge in the party s national vote share gives it a comfortable majority. which means the bjp will not have to depend on its allies in the national democratic alliance which it leads. this is the second successive election that has resulted in a decisive mandate since     . with its main challenger  the congress  barely holding on to its      tally and seemingly implacable foes  like the tdp  led by chandrababu naidu  wiped out or severely hobbled  like mamata banerjee and her tmc   the bjp will dominate the new lok sabha.but that s a mere technical detail. the real winner in this election is modi   as in       this year too the bjp has been carried to the victory stand by a tidal wave of support for an individual whose popularity matches that of jawaharlal nehru and indira gandhi in their heyday. modi  the strongman who presided over the previous nda  government  has emerged stronger than before. he will be straddling the nda  government like an undisputed leader with unquestioned authority and unparalleled power. he will be in control of not only the government but also the party  the rss  ideological fountainhead of the bjp  knows that it has a race winner and will do nothing to tame him for dressage shows.everybody who has voted for the bjp in this election would unhesitatingly say that s he voted for modi. the bjp s vast army of cadre and volunteers would similarly tell you that they worked hard to ensure a second term for modi   the      slogan   ab ki baar modi sarkar   was tweaked to  phir ek baar modi sarkar  to echo this verity. when a new government is formed in the coming days  it will largely be an extension of the previous regime with one difference  modi will be far more powerful than he was even a year or a month ago in a manner vladimir putin is powerful in russia and xi jinping is powerful in china.also read  the modi wave is real   bjp wins     of seats pm held rallies incliched as it may sound  along with this power will come tremendous responsibility. if expectations were high in       they are overwhelmingly so in     . people expect modi sarkar  .  to deliver   rapidly  visibly and transparently. all that could have been held against modi for not living up to the hopes generated in      was smothered by nationalist fervour following the terrorist attack in pulwama and the subsequent action to bring terror sponsoring pakistan to heel. that fervour is bound to dissipate over time. modi s challenge lies in not letting his popularity deflate.for that he has to get back to work and restart the engine of governance which has been virtually shut down for the last three months or more. he has to put together a new team without disturbing the equilibrium of the past five years. he has to post an agenda and get cracking on it immediately. in the short term  that agenda would have four items   how to get the economy going full steam  how to make the transition from jobs as we understand them to employment opportunities of the future  how to deal with discontent in the farm sector  and  how to ensure india s security in a hostile western neighbourhood where uncertainties loom large like ominous dark clouds. a dramatic reach out to pakistan  as we saw in the opening months of his previous tenure  is not an option. freezing out india s enemy number one is not an option either.in the medium term he has to look at fulfilling the promises made on abolishing article    a  updating the national register of citizens for the entire country  beginning with west bengal  and passing the citizenship amendment bill  apart from addressing problems in the banking sector  securing investments  speeding up infrastructure building and evolving a better mechanism to tend to centre state relations that have suffered in the absence of cooperative federalism. the list is long  he has to pick and choose instead of piling too much on his plate as he did in the last five years.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  this is what changed for voters from      to      lok sabha elections  nothingit should be remembered that the end of the parliamentary election marks the beginning of the run up to crucial assembly elections in politically important states ranging from haryana to maharashtra to jammu   kashmir to delhi. whatever modi does in the next three to four months would have an impact on the electoral outcome in these states where anti incumbency sentiments have stacked up in varying degrees and for a variety of reasons. the modi factor may not be enough to overcome those sentiments.even before the results of the parliamentary election were formally declared  world leaders have rushed to congratulate modi. benjamin netanyahu has stood out for his effusive message in hindi. xi jinping s elaborate message  restrained but warm  stands out for the speed with which it was issued. it comes at a moment when he has called for a new  long march  to overcome the challenges posed by us trade restrictions and a slowing economy.xi  the unquestioned strongman of china who is there to stay for the foreseeable future  has his own set of problems to address. modi  the newly crowned unquestioned strongman of india who is here to stay for the foreseeable future  his critics and opponents should not pin their hopes to winning the      election   has his own set of problems to address. with amit shah most likely in the cabinet as his deputy  he would have more time to devote to finding solutions to them and craft his own  long march  to delivery which has to be  in the bare minimum  as spectacular as the may    verdict.the author is a distinguished fellow at orf.this article was first published on orf. views are personal.




only thing missing from vivek oberoi s narendra modi is the cape
text size  a  a what better way to celebrate narendra modi s historic mandate in the lok sabha election than with a bollywood  biography  movie that blurs fact and fiction to make him a larger than life leader  omung kumar s film pm narendra modi starring vivek oberoi is on a mission to write a new history   one that wipes away any blemish modi may have had.the film fits perfectly as a sequel to bal narendra  childhood stories of narendra modi and as a prequel to akshay kumar s  apolitical  interview with modi in april.the film tells the  very long  story of modi  right from his selling tea days as a young boy to his win in the      election. the film portrays narendra damodardas modi   a name that is repeated so many times  you almost want to make a drinking game out of it   as the golden boy  who can do no wrong. he is always thinking of others  he is unambitious and not power hungry  he focusses on the greater good  he takes political advice from a saadhu  and he has no intention of getting married  all the qualities of an ideal leader and the most improbable politician.the film hypes narendra modi as such a golden superhero that by the end of the first hour you wonder where the cape is and when the flying abilities will kick in. modi is seen donating blood to both gujarat earthquake and gujarat riot victims. he even pulls out people from the rubble  and single handedly digs a canal for the people of kutch to save them.the film starts with a disclaimer  announcing that its main intention is to inspire young minds to be more nationalistic. and on that part  it definitely delivers because the entire film has more nationalism stuffed into it than kangana ranaut and anupam kher s monologues put together.surprisingly  it doesn t skip over narendra modi s controversial past. unsurprisingly  it shows him as a super secular chief minister during the godhra riots  who actually goes to the streets and helps people.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalthough the film isn t directly anti muslim or anti minority  it is replete with anti pakistan  anti congress  and pro hindutva rhetoric. it goes as far as having dialogues along the lines of   everyone in this country is a hindu   even muslims and buddhists   and   india is secular because of hinduism.  every scene just gets worse and worse. one scene even has modi likening the gujarat model of development to the perfect cup of chai. he doesn t stop there  and makes chai in front of his cabinet while describing the gujarat model.by the end of it  if you re not pulling your hair out  there is vivek oberoi s performance that makes you question all your life decisions that led up to this point of you sitting in the movie theatre. the music is as original as using songs like saare jahan se achha and a rap song  because of the gully boy phenomenon  as background music. the screenplay is bland  and the editing seems to be as convincing as the foiled  terror threats  to modi s life.by the end of pm narendra modi you are exhausted   of the  artistic liberties  the makers took  of the complete whitewashing of history and of the blatant propaganda being tested on you.chinua achebe once said   until the lions have their own historians  the history of the hunt will always glorify the hunter. also read  vijay rupani watches modi biopic   jyotiraditya scindia takes a break in ussubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




forget what bible teaches you  goliath modi just crushed a clueless david in india
text size  a  a the hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party s governance related follies are well documented. the party did not fight the   th lok sabha election on its record of good governance. still  it is likely to increase its seat share in parliament from     in      to     in     . its vote share is also likely to go up from    per cent in      to approximately    per cent in     . its national electoral footprint has expanded. in       the bjp won one third or more seats of the total seats on offer in    states. in       this figure is likely to increase to    states. these outcomes are simply remarkable. but they are not counterintuitive or puzzling if we consider the power differential that has opened up between the bjp and its rivals.the bharatiya janata party  bjp  consistently portrays its rival congress as the party of privilege and power  the proverbial goliath. narendra modi often refers to rahul gandhi or the congress as the  naamdar   the privileged ones   and calls himself or the bjp the  kaamdar   the working class . this clever branding  however  is deeply ironic. because over the past five years  the bjp has emerged as the electoral giant  the actual goliath. the congress  by contrast  has been reduced to the clueless underdog.also read  how indian voters saw congress   a laid back party with no leadership   agendathe reason we are drawn to the david vs goliath parable in which the weaker david defeats the far stronger goliath is its exceptionalism. in real life  though  on most days  raw power matters and goliath crushes david. as long as the bjp holds the organisational  financial and leadership advantage over its adversaries  it will have a head start in most electoral races.the bjp s return to government with a parliamentary majority  despite its underwhelming performance in office  highlights the salience of forces that matter to electoral mobilisation   organisational strength  financial resources and charismatic leadership. none of these elements can guarantee a party s electoral dominance alone  but together these factors form a potent combination.the bjp has at its disposal the services of the largest mobilisation force in the country  its ideological fountainhead  the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss . walter andersen and shridhar damle tell us that the strength of the rss volunteer cadre stood between  .  and   million in     . the organisation s shakhas or branches are spread over        locations. the membership and alumni of the    rss affiliates add another   million volunteers to the total number of potential mobilisers available to the bjp.these volunteers work alongside the bjp party workers during elections  and in between elections  they expand and nurture the ideological networks of party supporters. they train new entrants  introduce them to the hindu nationalist narrative  and connect individuals and families sympathetic to this ideology. during elections  they monitor and mentor party workers. no other indian party even comes close to matching the organisational support that the rss provides to the bjp.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe bjp  today  is india s wealthiest party by a long margin. according to the association for democratic reforms  the bjp s income in         was rs    .   crore    .   per cent of the total income of the national parties . by          the bjp s income had increased to rs     .  crore    .  per cent of the income of national parties .also read  scale of bjp s massive      victory can t solely be attributed to national security   polarisationduring the same period  the congress saw its relative share in the total income for national parties fall from    per cent to    per cent. the congress only had approximately rs     crore in its coffers in        . similarly  the electoral bonds introduced as a vehicle for campaign finance have been cornered by the bjp. in             per cent party contributions made through electoral bonds went to the bjp. the financial resources allowed the bjp to fund the best organised campaign rallies  launch a campaign television channel  finance an army of social media warriors  and support the campaign expenses of their candidates.but the one factor that gives the bjp the biggest edge over its competitors is the leadership of narendra modi. he is india s omnipresent leader on the ground and in the voter s mind. voters receive text messages from modi  they hear him on the radio  and see him across television channels and on billboards. his images appear on shopping bags  t shirts as well as on women s suits and saris. he dominates the national conversation like no other contemporary politician. he is the face of indian foreign and security policies. the government s programmes and schemes are associated with him. within his own party  he is viewed as the supreme leader. public opinion polls find him to be india s most popular politician. lifted by the perception that the bjp managers have succeeded to build for him  modi stands taller than all other leaders inside and outside his party.also read  modi has turned me into a devdas. was i day dreaming for the past   years  shobhaa dethe bjp is currently in power in    of india s    state assemblies  and the results of the parliamentary elections suggest that this number will increase. the congress supported or led state governments in karnataka  madhya pradesh and rajasthan are suddenly vulnerable. we should not be surprised to see the rupture of alliances and defections of coalition partners in these states. they may not survive these results.amit ahuja is an associate professor of political science at the university of california   santa barbara and the author of mobilizing the marginalized  ethnic parties without ethnic movements  oxford university press      . rajkamal singh is a doctoral student in political science at the university of california santa barbara.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this   point economic agenda can help modi fulfil his promises
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi s new government will face challenges on the economic front. growth is slowing down  exports are not doing well  corporate earnings are not robust  and tax targets have not been met.while direct transfers may assuage resentment for a short duration  they are not long term solutions for india. the long term solution is sustained economic growth which pulls the population out of poverty.the reform agenda requires a change in the philosophy of the role of the state and markets in the economy. issues such as jobs  investment  credit  farm incomes and exports need to be addressed. but this should not be done in a piecemeal way. the state needs to regulate markets  to enable them to work more effectively  rather than replace markets.liberalise factor marketsthe last three decades of growth have come from the  small  and  shallow  liberalisation that was done in the     s. today  the steam from these reforms is running out. the reforms were in product markets  in international trade and investments. this allowed india to export services and gain some foreign investment.however  in the broader economic picture  the reforms were small   limited to trade and manufacturing. factor markets such as land  labour and capital were not liberalised.the reforms resulted in growth in sectors which did not employ large numbers  used highly paid workers  were capital intensive and depended on export markets. india s labour intensive small scale sectors were not given any  freedoms .even in terms of sectors  india s biggest employer  agriculture  lost out. draconian laws like the essential commodities act  agricultural land ceiling laws and agricultural market committee laws are still on the statute books  shackle farmers to unproductive farms and prevent them from participating in free markets.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe      reforms were also  shallow . there were no substantive legislative policy changes. for example  the root of most  licence and permit raj  powers lies in the industries  development regulation  act      . this gives the government broad powers to prevent setting up industries  control prices of products  and a host of other restrictions. it was under this legislation that the government would pass draconian  control orders . this law gave birth to the cement control order  which limited the number of cement bags one could buy to build one s home  and the aluminium control order  which banned the use of aluminium for canned drinks.sadly  post       only the control orders were withdrawn. the overall legislation is still in force  and the government may  in principle  bring back the pre liberalisation  licence raj  at any time. similarly  while foreign investments have been liberalised  the legislation governing foreign investments  the foreign exchange management act        bans all cross border capital flows unless permitted by the central bank.the retreat of the state from market activities has been incomplete. in telecom  existing psus were allowed to function while new licences were given to the private sector. the state stood back as the private sector took over the process of bringing efficiency and quality and lowering prices. however  in contrast  the banking sector continues to be plagued by government ownership and the problems it brings with it. one could argue that the state has worked actively to prevent the growth of private sector banks by withholding licences and creating an unequal playing field which prefers government banks.deeper reforms across sectorsthe reforms of the     s can take us only so far. while there have been substantial changes in india s legal system like the electronic securities trading system  a modern competition law  shift to value added taxes  a new bankruptcy code and setting up of an inflation target  the state is yet to remove  restrictions  on citizens in the economic field. this requires the state to rewrite laws in major areas of the economy  labour  land  agricultural markets  industrial licensing and finance.also read  modi reigns supreme. now india s economy awaitsland regulationbefore gst  indian businesses faced multiple taxes from various authorities. land regulation in india faces a similar problem.the severe restrictions on agricultural land in terms of land ceiling  leasing  and use have locked farmers into unviable agricultural practices. land ceiling depresses prices and prevents farmers from exiting agriculture. leasing restrictions have the same effect. land use restrictions prevent farmers from doing any other activity and retard support services to agriculture like warehousing and processing.while land is a state subject  the government will have to address it to improve farmer incomes. just like the urban land ceiling laws were withdrawn in the mid     s with leadership from the central government  it is time to repeal the agricultural land ceiling laws.agricultural marketsparticipating in national and international markets is the cornerstone of creating wealth. the     s reforms allowed indian businesses to participate in global markets. india s software industry is an example of the success of globalisation for india. similarly  gst removes barriers to intra india trade and will have positive outcomes for indian industry.however  indian agricultural markets are crippled by apmc laws and restrictions placed by the essential commodities act. as long as these laws exist  india will not gain a national market in agricultural goods. the government has tried to bypass the problem through the e national agricultural market programme. it does not seem to be generating the volumes expected of a country like india.industrial restrictionsas long as legislation like the      industries regulation law and many others like it remain on the statute books  india is at risk of reverting to command and control economic systems. such laws hang like the sword of damocles over every business in india. this encourages short term business policies at the expense of long term business strategies. if there is no guarantee that a favourable policy will be there next year  why should a business make long term investments financewhile some movement has been made in the financial sector  the basic structure of indian finance is still plagued with an  everything banned until permitted  approach  combined with regulatory failures in consumer protection.in finance  the legal response has been only to emergencies without rethinking the first principles of regulation. the disturbing regularity with which the financial sector faces a crisis every few years is symptomatic of structural problems in regulation which have not been addressed. this includes retreating from the banking sector and changing the philosophy of regulation.a new approach to regulationfor the next three decades of economic growth  the state has to withdraw from prohibiting citizens from carrying out mutually beneficial transactions of their own free will. farmers need the freedom to sell their produce to whomever they want  or even exit farming by selling their land. labourers and firms need the freedom to draw up employment contracts that are acceptable to both of them  instead of being jacketed into labour laws. financial firms need the freedom to write credit default swaps to protect investors from il fs like default situations.this freedom will need  protection  from the government. protecting the freedom of citizens to carry out legitimate business is no mean task. it will require the indian regulatory and bureaucratic philosophy to change. instead of pursuing the goal of price control and production control  they have to move towards contract enforcement and consumer protection.india has to de emphasise controlling the price of drugs and re emphasise ensuring the quality of drugs. it has to stop worrying about the exchange rate and worry about preventing corporate frauds like il fs.ila patnaik is an economist and a professor at the national institute of public finance and policy.shubho roy is a consultant at nipfp.views are personal.also read  india s new govt should focus on easing land acquisition rulesfor latest updates on lok sabha elections  click heresubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




with another massive win  this is modi s india now
text size  a  a after a long and arduous election  with months of campaigning and voting spread over seven phases  india s     million voters have spoken. and  if not with one voice  then close to it. the bharatiya janata party of prime minister narendra modi has been handed another historic mandate.modi s      victory was already record setting   the first time a single party had attained a parliamentary majority in three decades. while every vote hasn t yet been counted  it seems that he might equal or even surpass that figure this year. to win once at that scale was astounding  a black swan event. to win twice means that indian politics  and india itself  has changed beyond recognition.also read  live updates  people of india have decided  says rahul gandhi after congress   allies lead in just    seatsfor the first decades after independence  india was a democracy but nevertheless a one party state. the indian national congress  the party that spearheaded the independence movement  dominated most states and had a stranglehold on power in new delhi. it was voted out once in       after prime minister indira gandhi turned towards authoritarianism and was punished by a united opposition. still  not until the     s did the party enter a permanent decline.at that point  india ushered in an era of coalitions. a patchwork of regional  caste based and ideologically distinct parties held the balance of power. it s no surprise that this period also coincided with the growth of the private sector following the liberalization of the economy in     . parties with no monopoly on the state are less likely to seek purely statist solutions.modi s successive victories mark another era of indian politics. no other political chieftains are holding the balance of power  only modi matters. back in the days of one party rule  a sycophantic congress politician said of his leader  indira is india. that was hyperbole. but no politician since indira gandhi has had as powerful a claim to be identified with india s conception of itself as modi now does.how has he earned that claim  multiple explanations for the bjp s victory have already been trotted out  the organizational strength of the party  its vast advantages in money and resources  the covert and overt backing of supposedly independent institutions   all hallmarks of democratic strongmen globally. others will point to the weakness of the opposition and its crisis of leadership  or to modi s reputation for incorruptibility  his muscular foreign policy and the popularity of some of his welfare schemes.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  how modi shah s bjp got the better of congress   everyone elseall these  of course  are factors. but they didn t determine this election. neither did the economy. regardless of the official figures for gross domestic product growth  the economy is under performing. it s rare anywhere in the world for incumbents to increase their political strength under such circumstances.no  india has proved bill clinton wrong  it s identity  stupid. this election was fought and won over identity   the identity of india and the identity of indians.modi is the perfect representative for the young  aspirational  majoritarian  impatient indians who have put him into office twice now. an overwhelming number of these     million voters see in him a self made man  one who has every intention of asserting india s centrality to world affairs. more  he appears strong and decisive  and wishes to impose a unity and uniformity on indian politics. this clarity is comforting for most of his core voters.the india of the past saw itself as a patchwork of competing identities  represented by the multiple powerful satraps of the coalition era and by the many factions within the umbrella tradition of the congress prior to that. the bjp  under modi  permits no such balancing. india is strong if it is united  modi s voters feel  and unity requires the welding of these multiple identities into a single one.hyper nationalists on twitter  as well as cabinet ministers  attack modi s opponents as the  tukde tukde  gang   literally  those who want to break india into pieces. the bjp s electoral logic has long been incredibly simple  over four fifths of india is hindu and the bjp is the party that best represents hindu interests. if most hindus vote for them out of religious solidarity rather than on economic  class or caste interests  then the bjp will win.the truth is that this is increasingly what modi and the party have achieved. their triumph isn t merely a product of political management. it is a rhetorical and ideological battle  a culture war  which they have won.all bets are off about india s future. the west has long seen this country as a natural ally  one that has similar liberal institutions  is outward looking and acts modestly on the global stage. but that is not the india wanted by the voters who have twice now demonstrated their loyalty to modi so dramatically. just as indians are looking at themselves and their country anew  so the world will have to recalibrate its assumptions about india.mihir sharma is a bloomberg opinion columnist. he was a columnist for the indian express and the business standard  and he is the author of  restart  the last chance for the indian economy. subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi s      victory is hindutva  .    and dalits   obcs form its backbone
text size  a  a  together we will build a strong and inclusive india   tweeted the prime minister of india  narendra modi  as he led the national democratic alliance to a historic victory in the      lok sabha elections. here   inclusive  is the operative word. the false narrative manufactured by the opposition and a section of left leaning intelligentsia on systemic oppression of dalits in the last five years has disastrously collapsed.the prime minister comes from one of the socially backward communities in gujarat. his second consecutive landslide triumph in lok sabha elections represents an assertion of the collective subaltern. in modi  the backward and dalits see one of their own. sitting in new delhi  his actions may look eccentric to some but they have found great resonance with the masses  if not the classes. when he calls himself a chowkidar  the community of chowkidars  especially the ones whose traditional occupation is chowkidari  like paswans  finds a strong reverberation.when the prime minister invites a bunch of safai karamcharis to his residence and washes their feet  it strikes a chord with the valmiki community. he connects with small and marginal traders with his words on chaiwala and pakodewala. inclusive policy interventions like stand up india and mudra by the modi government did make it to the bottom of the pyramid. the beneficiaries of these schemes are largely the socially and politically backward segments.also read  how modi shah s bjp got the better of congress   everyone elseit is also the rise of hindutva  .  that is culturally diverse and socially inclusive. the bjp with this victory has re established the massive expansion of hindutva base from the below. the coming together of obc s and dalits in favour of the bjp will have long term implications. this is a significant take away from the state of uttar pradesh. the so called mahagathbandhan in an attempt to save their turf have only marginally done well. the family based regional parties  enterprise that were thriving on social justice were not able to capture the subaltern mind.this victory will realign the social alliances and see a new wave of optimism and integration. the fake fear created around reservations by the  threat to constitution  brigade will hopefully take some lessons from the electoral outcome.the author is a fellow at india foundation and assistant professor at patna university. he is a member of the state executive committee  bharatiya janata yuva morcha  bihar. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




for   years  modi put national security reforms on hold. now  he must act fast
text size  a  a the      lok sabha election has put national security  an omnipresent theme during the campaign  in the minds of the indian public. and although the debate over it lacked substance and was mainly driven by rhetoric throughout the campaign  the new government will have no option but to address the long overdue issue of national security reforms. the approach has to be holistic and long term in order to meet the challenges of the   st century conflict. incremental reforms will not do. parliament  the media and the public must hold the government accountable for preparedness and performance with respect to national security.here are the major points for the new bjp government to consider as part of the national security reforms agenda higher defence structures and decision makingin the past  there has been too much ambiguity and ad hocism in our higher defence planning and decision making. the creation of the national security council  nsc  by the first nda government led by atal bihari vajpayee in      to advise the prime minister about all aspects of national security was a major step towards reform. in composition  it remained dominated by retired officers from the ministry of external affairs and the indian police service. the most important component of national security   the military   only played a marginal role through the three chiefs being members of the strategic policy group  spg   token representation of retired military officers in national security advisory board  nsab   and subsequently one  military advisor .the second nda government  which returned to the centre after a gap of    years with bjp s narendra modi at the helm  took two major decisions for the nsc s reform   the creation of the defence planning committee  dpc  in april      and revamping of the spg in october       both to be now headed by the national security advisor  nsa . earlier  the dpc was headed by the defence minister while the spg by the cabinet secretary.also read  as bjp   congress fight over surgical strikes  india s stand on national security is exposedthe distinctions between the roles of the defence minister  cabinet secretary  the three chiefs  and the nsa have blurred  creating further ambiguity in the national security chain of command. from only an advisory role  the nsa is now the chief national security executive responsible for all national security advice  planning and execution  and the de facto chief of defence staff  cds .it would be prudent for the new government to review the higher defence structures and decision making to bring about a comprehensive statutory national security act to cover all aspects of national security planning and execution to avoid ambiguity and ensure accountability.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowstrategic review and national security strategythe new government through the nsc spg dpc must carry out a long term strategic review to establish what the present and future security challenges   both internal and external   are to evolve a comprehensive national security strategy. this must be formal and put under parliamentary scrutiny.the national security strategy is the starting point for all security planning because it formally spells out the vision to tackle the threats faced by the nation and leads it to acquiring the much needed capabilities. no indian government has so far spelt out a clear national security strategy  while the capabilities are more tailored to fight the last war and not the future wars. parliament and the public must ensure the government is forced into formalising a national security strategy and putting the non classified parts in public domain.financial allocation and capability developmentbased on the strategic review and the national security strategy  the new government must decide the force levels and the technology necessary for external and internal security. this must be matched with the availability of finances on a long term basis. the current force levels were based on decisive conventional wars as envisaged in the     s and the     s. in a nuclear backdrop  future conflicts will be driven by forces using high end military technology to be applied in a short time.also read  bjp s priority is national security but look who asked most defence questions in lok sabhathe strength of the armed forces must be optimised through restructuring  reorganisation and infusion of modern technology. this is only possible if three per cent of gdp is earmarked for defence. as a percentage of the gdp  the defence budgets of last five years have been the lowest in    years with the exception of     . the current policy for capability development with inadequate budget is a political hoax.tri service integrationthe present system of tri service cooperation is ill suited for modern warfare. inter service rivalry is a lame excuse for political inaction. there is an urgent need to integrate the three services under a chief of defence staff  who should be the advisor to the government on all matters related to external security. tri service theatre commands must be created and directly controlled by the cds.the cds must have direct access to the political leadership and must receive his orders through the statutory chain of command.internal securityit is empirical wisdom that internal strife is always resolved politically. our governments have been notorious for never defining the military end state for the insurgency prone areas. in absence of a clear political strategy  the prolonged deployment of the military itself continues to fuel the violence.also read  updating election model code of conduct is only way to keep national security out of ralliesthe government must formally lay down its strategy for internal security  and clearly define the military and political end state it is seeking in jammu and kashmir  northeast and the red corridor. it must focus on conflict resolution and not conflict management.once the military end state is achieved  the armed forces must be progressively withdrawn from strife prone areas  and the responsibility handed over to the crpf and the state police. this is the primary task of the crpf and the state police and they must be organised  equipped and trained to do the same.let me stick my neck out and say that the military component of our comprehensive national power is currently the weakest link. we are way behind china and no longer have a decisive edge over pakistan. having ridden to victory on national security  the new bjp government has no option but to focus on holistic national security reforms and capability development.lt gen h s panag pvsm  avsm  r  served in the indian army for    years. he was goc in c northern command and central command. post retirement  he was member of armed forces tribunal. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india matlab narendra modi  how the pm learnt branding from coca cola
text size  a  a presidential prime minister narendra modi is marching back to raisina hills. pm modi seems to have persuaded the people of india to embrace a muscular  aggressive developmental hinduvta  at least momentarily. his  permanent election  mode turned     lok sabha constituencies into one national  nationalist  constituency and converted parliamentary elections into a presidential referendum. and this has paid huge dividends for the bjp.modi s presidential power  as the election results demonstrate  is the product of three related sources.muscular neo hinduismmodi has invoked a deeply troubling  but politically beneficial  idea of hindu majority being threatened by internal and external enemies. he has gone beyond  regulation hinduism  to a muscular version of resurgent neo hinduism. and in the process  modi has challenged traditional ideas of plurality  diversity and secularism in india.i was in banaras  varanasi  recently and witnessed his emergence as a new ruler of kashi  a glitzy city combining fantasy and economy. don t forget  the politics of hindutva feeds on the demolition of what it considers  structures . how else could the city of varanasi have tolerated the destruction of temples in the name of building a grand corridor between kashi vishwanath temple and the river ganges also read  bjp sweeps rajasthan  gujarat  haryana  delhi  mp  assam  maharashtra  karnataka   moremedia mythologiesthe  unblinking eye  of television  the insanity of social media and the endless whatsapp forwards have added to modi s presidential leadership new mythologies and symbols. in presenting his image as that of a problem solver rather than a theoretician of justice  analysts have not yet recognised the stylistic communicative successes of narendra modi.his vastly popular public radio show  mann ki baat  has brought him closer to the people. i was not surprised when a septuagenarian dinesh told me at godowlia chowk in varanasi that he regularly listens modi s  mann ki baat  to fight off old age despondency. this is what has made modi sort of a  new age  western televangelist.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe  surgical strikes  were seen by his followers as a deeply cognitive and psychological relief from immediate family and social stress. so  this public and private media induced feeling of togetherness  shared by upper castes  backward castes and sections of dalits is the spine of the rising bjp.also read  why modi has reasons to be anxious as he prepares for a second term in officewholesale vs retail politicsusing his humble background and gujarati straightforwardness  modi presented the      elections as the moral equivalent of war and hyped national security as the panacea for all ills in society. this not only made opposition parties appear as a greedy squabbling  mahamilavat  bunch but also helped him blunt the power of caste to a large extent in north india. no wonder the hyper personalised political campaign of pm modi worked wonders  while a more decentralised  non personalised campaign of the congress party huffed puffed with intermittent success on the ground.instead of highlighting various policies in the retail politics of fast moving consumer goods  narendra modi captured the imagination of masses and classes with a highly emotive  wholesale  politics of personality and character.that s why he kept harping throughout the campaign that he works    hours a day and hardly sleeps. even if it is fake news  people believed him.just recall aamir khan starrer  thanda matlab coca cola  ad campaign that made coca cola a household name in india. modi has instinctively followed this marketing strategy of fast moving consumer goods and sold himself as the biggest brand of what he called  vikaspanthi  politics. this is the power of messaging that the      lok sabha elections have witnessed.consider his game changing political marketing speech in uttar pradesh s bhadohi district. in a district with considerable muslim population  he said   after independence  there have been four types of governance  parties and political culture    naampanthi   dynastic   vaampanthi   left    daam aur damanpathi   relying on money and muscle  and the fourth one that has been brought by us  the  vikaspanthi   development .more than anything else  the marketing of a strong  muscular image of a  vikaspanthi  who can punish pakistan has brought modi back to power.also read       will be known as the  aayega to modi hi  electioncongress  fragmented campaignin contrast  the congress party led opposition got mired into the fragmented images of farmer s stress  joblessness and demonetisation pangs. the opposition focussed more on confrontational  negative political marketing than offering aspirational products for an emergent india.during elections  i travelled across up  bihar and jharkhand  and could not find a single soul who mentioned the congress s much hyped nyay scheme. in contrast  a large majority of people believed in presidential pm modi and his      politics of messaging and imaging.the modi voters could not identify any single economic policy that enhanced their livelihoods or employment prospects  but they still supported his second term. most respondents in up and bihar told me   give him at least another term . perhaps a presidential term limit has silently set in  giving modi at least a two term presidency.indian politics has traditionally been defined by caste  corruption and crime. but if my recent field trails are to be believed  contemporary indian politics has changed beyond recognition. it has now become a political market for voters operating around  cs  catch  connect and close.voters have increasingly become consumers of branded products. so  catching and connecting with voters has become vital. in this game  branding of the product matters. a good marketing campaign always needs to have a consistent and direct message. this is where the grand old party congress has failed. therefore  it is not surprising that the nyay scheme failed to make a mark.but credit must be given to congress president rahul gandhi for taking his youthful exuberant rhetoric of  chowkidaar chor hai  deep into the modi s camp and sully some of the pm s lustre. many people in the field told me that more than anyone else  rahul gandhi stands tall as the only politician who has challenged the power of  billionaire raj  in india. if pm modi has ensured himself his second presidential term  rahul gandhi has also stayed in the ring of indian politics like the proverbial  gadfly   despite yogendra yadav s death wish for the congress party.also read  yogendra yadav live  bjp not only outsmarted sp bsp caste combine  but also yogi s poor imageto conclude  the victory of narendra modi has all the hallmarks of remaking india. it presents the risk of a  democratic dictatorship  or altered version of  bureaucratic authoritarianism . it also reinforces the trend towards a personal and hegemonic leadership  which is quite visible in the emergent model of a presidential prime minister in india.with or without narendra modi  the office of the presidential prime minister will witness more aggressive centralisation in the future and system altering leadership towards de facto presidentialism. so  watch out. we know presidentialism is usually an  irresponsible system of government  in the words of famous brazilian statesman ruy barbosa.the author is a poet  policy researcher and professor of political science at tata institute of social sciences  mumbai . his recent book is banaras and the other  first of a trilogy on religious cities in india. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




     will be known as the  aayega to modi hi  election
text size  a  a the bjp s main official slogan this election was  main bhi chowkidar   i m a gatekeeper too .yet  it is the bjp s unofficial slogan that has gained popular currency   aayega to modi hi   after all  modi will return .the      general election became synonymous with the bjp slogan  achhe din aaney waley hain   the good days are about to come . in the same way       will be best remembered for  aayega to modi hi   a line that one heard a lot in street conversations and on social media as well.the  hi  at the end says a lot. it acknowledges all the ifs and buts  the challenges the bjp has faced  the resentment over jobs and economy  the rising index of opposition unity  the lack of enthusiasm  and the campaign mistakes the bjp may have made here and there. yet  the answer to all the questions is    aayega to modi hi .also read  rahul gandhi s congress gets thumbs down  unlikely to cross three figuresthe unofficial slogan became more popular than the official slogan  telling you how the bjp shifted voters  attention to the all important question  who will be the pm  kaun banega pradhan mantri is all that mattered. unlike       it wasn t about hope this time  it was only about the persona of modi.indian voters like to figure out who s likely to win an election and then be on the winning side. at the very least  enough floating voters think this way to change the result. the word of mouth campaign  aayega to modi hi  helped answer the questions floating voters asked.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe slogan helped further the sense of modi s invincibility and inevitability. for anyone who thought the bjp could end up with     seats  and would have to struggle to put together a coalition  the slogan shut them up with  aayega to modi hi .the slogan was also a reminder of how the opposition does not have a pm candidate  and that it can t even come together in many states. the slogan pointed to the impossibility of the idea of rahul gandhi as the prime minister.as the tone of the slogan seemed to acknowledge there are challenges before the bjp  it indirectly pointed to the tina factor  there is no alternative.also read  winning anything less than     seats would be a defeat for narendra modiwith the bjp likely to sweep the lok sabha today  a lot will be said about modi s popularity  how everyone voted for him  even muslims. we ll be told how modi and amit shah did everything right  demonetisation was great and crores of jobs were created. the bjp  its social media machinery  its spokespersons masquerading as journalists will all conveniently forget how the bjp used the tina factor as a narrative to shape public debates.contrast as strategyin february       pm modi launched a surprise attack at his predecessor manmohan singh. from then on  he has relentlessly attacked the congress party  from nehru to rahul. the bjp started attacking rahul gandhi day in and day out. the negative campaigning was surprising considering how modi had won      with positive messaging around vikas  development.the congress supporters saw this as a sign of rahul gandhi s and the congress  growing importance. in truth  modi was highlighting the contrast between himself and rahul gandhi. as demonetisation s failure had become clear and modi knew the achhe din would remain elusive  he started asking voters   is the congress better than me  in this way  modi marvellously kept the focus of national politics on himself. going by latest figures  the congress is now unable to even double its seats from the      figure of    seats. that is a reflection on how people saw rahul gandhi as a poor competitor to modi.contrast is an often overlooked but important way of understanding politics. voters tend to see any election as a contest between two sides  and in national politics  the two sides are the congress and the bjp. modi s presidential campaigning has made regional parties less important in the national discourse. just increasing the contrast between the bjp and the congress  between modi and rahul  has been central to modi s strategy since february     .in uttar pradesh  i met many people who said they were voting for the bjp on account of modi. but if this was a state election  they said  they wouldn t have voted for the bjp.why  because  aayega to modi hi . they were thinking national  they were thinking of the central government  and in national politics  the other side was rahul  not akhilesh yadav or mayawati. they knew that a vote for akhilesh or mayawati would be a vote for rahul since they would eventually ally with him. and the thought of rahul gandhi as pm was anathema to them.also read  up firmly with modi and bjp as akhilesh mayawati gathbandhan faltersthat is why  aayega to modi hi  was a logical extension of  aur hain kaun    who else is there  the result may not be very different in      if rahul gandhi remains at the helm of the congress party.views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




subramanian swamy attacking modi minister as shakuni shows he must read mahabharata again
text size  a  a rajya sabha mp subramanian swamy tuesday tweeted confidently about how prime minister narendra modi s second term would be without shakuni  clearly referring to a powerful minister against whom he has long held a grouse.swamy loves to sprinkle his tweets and politics with characters from texts like the mahabharata and the ramayana. he famously uses vishkanya and tadaka to describe his political opponent. but perhaps he needs to go for an upgrade. shakuni is no longer the villain you grew up hating   though sadhguru calls shakuni a  slimeball of a man .author and mythologist devdutt pattanaik  however  offers a different take on this much maligned character in mahabharata. he refers to an old folk tale from andhra pradesh based on the epic  where the elders of the kuru clan  from which pandavas and kauravas descended  put gandhari s entire family under house arrest. the story goes that gandhari s father realises the family will starve to death and decides that none but his youngest son would eat the little food they have. this son  shakuni  would survive to take revenge. this folk story transforms the villain of the sanskrit epic into a victim and an avenging angel. so who is shakuni   a hero or villain  it all depends on the story we are told  and stories we choose to believe   writes pattanaik.also read  our daughters will see sita as a single mother and draupadi as a  metoo warriora new book  shakuni  master of the game  juggernaut   by journalist ashutosh nadkar  reinforces this theory  as he narrates the mahabharata from his point of view. it also provides a psychological explanation for all his machinations and manipulations  which stem from his desire to avenge his beautiful sister gandhari s marriage to the blind dhritarashtra  planting in him a lifelong desire to bring the great patriarch bhishma to justice and a hatred for the kurus.the prince of gandhara  shakuni has a limp  is light eyed  and is not trained to be a warrior. he does become a master of the dice  a wizard at backgammon  a quality that he finesses and which later helps his nephew duryodhana win the kingdom of indraprastha and all its possessions from the feckless yudhishtra.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowat every point though  his motivation is pure   to protect his sister  even if he uses any means of  deceit  duplicity and dissimulation   writes nadkar in his racy  revisionist retelling. shakuni moves to hastinapur  with his sister who chooses to wear a blindfold over her eyes  even as he masters  the art of looking like an innocent flower while actually being the deadly serpent that lay coiled beneath it .also read  hindu gods like rama   shiva have six packs now to kill bad guys  like american superheroesin recent years  authors and cultural commentators have reinvented the epics for us  transforming their protagonists from the cardboard characters we watched in the ramanand sagar and b.r. chopra versions on television. nadkar s book is one among a series from authors such as chitra banerjee divakaruni and samhita arni  which re examine the roles of central characters and give voice to hitherto forgotten  and supposedly marginal  characters such as ravana s sister shurpanakha  kavita kane s lanka s princess  and shantanu s wife ganga  anuja chandramouli s ganga  the constant goddess .shakuni is the latest to get og treatment.in fact  he is much like tyrion lannister   the imp  from the just concluded hbo series game of thrones  who does everything for the love of his queen  daenerys targaryen. he even advises jon snow  another targaryen  to murder daenerys so that she does not inflict any more death and destruction as she goes around  liberating the world . in the finale of game of thrones  as he helps westeros choose a new king  tyrion says prophetically   the sons of kings can be cruel and stupid  from now on  rulers will not be born. they will be chosen on this spot by the lords and ladies of westeros to serve the realm.  he may as well have been speaking of duryodhana. like shakuni  tyrion is not a master of war  but overcomes his lack of military training to perfect his art of strategic thinking.as he lies dying on the battlefield of kurukshetra  cut open by sahadeva s sword  shakuni has enough time to contemplate his actions and wonders why all his schemes are seen as treachery even today while kaurava adviser vidura s are considered ethical strategies and pandava tactician krishna s are regarded divine play. shakuni asks himself and the reader   was i the vilest of villains in that epic story  for nadkar  shakuni is tragic rather than evil  constantly thwarted in his designs by krishna. at one point  in frustration  the novel has shakuni saying   i realised there was no end to the depth of krishna s cunning   whether it was placing shikhandi as a shield in front of arjuna when attacking bhishma or persuading arjuna to aim at an unarmed karna.but shakuni acknowledges the biggest mistake of his life  that he did not condemn duryodhana s behaviour with draupadi after the game of dice. and he ends his life on a philosophical note  which would do us all a world of good   i realised  only belatedly  that my real fight was not with bhishma s might or vidura s wit. my true adversary was god.  that is  krishna.also read  robots guarded buddha s relics in an ancient indian legendperhaps  swamy would like to reconsider his description of shakuni as a villain. for dhritarashtra and duryodhana  and indeed his sister gandhari  he could not have been a better protector and a more honest saviour.swamy is obviously getting ready to position himself for that plum position in the new government  even before the results are out. his weapons of mass metaphors are ready from the epics just ahead of the new season of the twitter bharata.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




winning anything less than     seats would be a defeat for narendra modi
text size  a  a the exit poll numbers are unbelievable. there s no reason to suggest the bharatiya janata party led national democratic alliance should lose a single of the     seats in the lok sabha.it is likely that    may will prove the exit polls wrong   after all  they have mostly been wrong over the years. in       they suggested the nda was coming to power but could not foresee the bjp winning a majority on its own. the pattern may well be repeated.the modest exit polls foresee the nda winning anywhere between     and     seats. as for the bjp itself  the range is between     and     seats. only two exit polls have suggested that the bjp could win more than its      tally of     seats.why should the bjp or its allies lose a single seat  the way things are  they should be winning every single seat in india.also read  exit polls make it clear sp bsp alliance has failed to smash bjp  yogendra yadavthe congress party announced in advance that it was only seeking to triple its      numbers  from    to      which won t even be half of the majority mark  which is    . the party s data analyst  praveen chakravarty said this  and then madhya pradesh chief minister kamal nath repeated it. if the bjp s main opponent publicly says it is not even trying to win enough seats necessary to lead a coalition government  why should the bjp and its allies lose a single seat narendra modi has been gifted the poorest opposition possible. it can t come together and form coalitions even when it can see it is going to get wiped out. it can t come up with an election promise that would be believed and bought by the people. it can t do a campaign on what everyone knew was the greatest issue before the people   unemployment. worst of all  the opposition is so poor it doesn t have one leader who looks prime ministerial  whom the people of india would want to see as their pm.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe opposition didn t even try to win this election. in       there was at least an aam aadmi arvind kejriwal fighting in varanasi. this time  the opposition couldn t even put up a star candidate against modi in varanasi. modi didn t even go to varanasi after filing his nomination papers. the congress suggested it is not up for the fighting after priyanka gandhi said she was considering it. the samajwadi party didn t even put up their half strong local candidate. the walkover in varanasi is symbolic of the walkover modi got this election across india.it is strange  then  that even the most optimistic exit poll  axis myindia  sees the nda losing     of     seats. what s wrong with the people in these     constituencies  how could they want rahul gandhi as pm  or do they want an unstable coalition that makes india weak  a government that can t take strong decisions like demonetising    per cent of the currency overnight on a whim also read  pm modi is so confident of victory that he s already scheduled mann ki baat  . to be fair to opposition leaders  some say it s not all their fault. modi is the master of propaganda  they say. agreed. switch on the tv and you will only see namo and then there s a namo tv to switch to when the  news  channels are showing ads. on whatsapp and newspapers  on outdoor media and train tickets  modi is everywhere.this complete and total bombardment of the indian mind with the visage of narendra damodardas modi makes sure people think there is no one but modi. in a country of  .  billion people  aur hai kaun  wonder how the trains ever ran  how the wars were ever fought  how the roads were ever built before modi became prime minister. that is how modi propaganda makes people think. which is why one wonders  why should modi be losing a single seat on those approximately     seats that the axis myindia exit poll found the nda losing  one wonders if the opposition had a lot of money. after all  modi has outmatched the opposition in resources several times over. most of the opaque electoral bonds  money goes to the bjp  which was the party with the deepest coffers even before electoral bonds. we are not suggesting the yeddyurappa diaries have any truth in them and black money could be flowing in the bjp election campaigns. meanwhile  the opposition finds itself facing tax raids before elections  their small change taken away. it is bizarre that such a financially weak opposition should be winning even a single seat.the election commission has been so openly partisan  so afraid to censure prime minister modi  that it appears there are two different model codes of conduct   one for the top bjp leaders  and the other for the rest of the politicians. with the ec being so kind to modi  he knows he can get away with anything. and he does. which is why one wonders why modi should not win all     seats. if the umpire looks away when you cheat  why should you lose a single wicket also read  modi s second term needs to be bolder than his firstdoubt is human nature. sometimes people wonder if narendra modi is really the best deal for them. they wonder if they should try another leader  if there s one. could it be that rahul gandhi is not as bad  usually  the opposition will do something stupid  like rahul gandhi running away for a europe vacation  just when people are beginning to have doubts about modi. no problem  there s fake news for the doubtful modi supporter. just feed them fiction and they ll say rahul gandhi thinks potatoes can be turned into gold. feed them fiction and they ll think demonetisation was a great success.which is why one wonders how the bjp is losing a single seat. surely  the exit polls are playing it safe.it is human nature to see some people as their own and some as enemies. the bjp has played on this forever. as amit shah threatened to implement the nrc across india  he stoked the fear of  basically  expelling millions of muslims. by making hindus see muslims as their enemies  the bjp tries to make people forget caste and economy  regional aspirations and anti incumbency. which is why one wonders why the exit polls are so modest. in a country with    per cent hindus  how could the bjp lose any seat  given that hindutva majoritarianism has become so mainstream that a godse loving terror accused can be given a ticket  why do we still have any hindu not voting for the bjp the exit polls cannot be believed. the narendra modi led national democratic alliance must be all set to win     of     seats  a first in indian history. anything less than     will be a defeat for modi.as for that cancelled poll in vellore  it was cancelled because too much money was flowing into the seat. when it is held again  surely money won t be a problem for the nda.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




  reasons why modi remains in the hunt for a second term
text size  a  a in his opening statement at his joint press conference with bjp president amit shah  prime minister narendra modi pretty much declared victory in the elections. he also added that it will be that rare occurrence in indian politics when an incumbent with a majority wins a second term again with a full majority.exit polls might give us some indications  but we have to wait until    may to fact check this claim. given the state of our economy  massive  visible joblessness and farm distress  his adversaries had reasons to expect overwhelming anti incumbency. there has been very little evidence of that as yet.this may look counter intuitive to those schooled in classical  old fashioned analysis of the political mood. but in extensive travels tracking the campaign across the country  four points stand out. whatever the bjp nda numbers finally  these four would have greatly contributed to dulling the economic pain and anti incumbency.   a formidable new vote bank  a new  pan national caste based vote bank has risen. it consists of the upper castes. since       these had leaned increasingly towards the bjp  but there were always divisions. some brahmins continued voting for the congress for nostalgic reasons. individual thakur leaders swung some vote in the heartland  especially uttar pradesh. the jana sangh bjp always attracted the upper castes  but the only caste really committed to them were the banias. that s why indira gandhi always called them a  bania party   never a hindu party.now all upper castes have consolidated behind modi. they see in modi s bjp a force not just for hindutva  but for what they see as  merit   which they fear the minorities and the  less meritorious  lower castes will take away because of their voting power.also read    factors that will determine who will be india s next pm   who won twe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis new vote bank is as cohesive as  say  the muslims when it comes to voting against the bjp. in so much travel through these three months  i rarely found an upper caste voter who wasn t with the bjp. this helps modi counter muslims and other castes like yadavs who usually align with them. the last caste census was in       but at anything between       per cent  upper castes form the largest single vote bank in india  bigger than muslims  dalits or any cohesive obc group.   trumping disastrous macroeconomics with effective microeconomics  at the bjp press conference  shah claimed his party s government had focused on the last mile delivery of its schemes. he is right. we found that toilets  lpg  ujjwala   housing  pradhan mantri awas yojana   mudra and rural electrification are schemes whose benefits have by and large reached the recipients.nothing is perfect  of course. toilets are often short of water  many lpg recipients can t afford refills and mudra loans haven t always created employment. but  across the country  you can see that these have reached people. as have the first instalments of the farmers  direct benefit subsidy. for the really poor and far out  this is a big change. so much that is visible and tangible has reached their hands  mostly without having to pay bribes. theprint s remya nair and manasi phadke reported recently that  .   crore people had received mudra loans totalling rs  .  lakh crore. these schemes have touched far too many people in quick time to not matter to them.they neither understand nor bother about whether the gdp is up or down  reliable or fudged. they are too poor to yet be in the organised job market. getting a few things from the government in quick succession matters to them. i have chatted with several such people in these travels  and recorded these conversations on my phone. some of these i ve been sharing on my instagram page and theprint s. do check out.   building what upa planned and abandoned  the modi government has a much better record in building hard infrastructure   highways  ports  metros  bridges  other urban infrastructure   than upa    and it is visible to the naked eye. the congress can say with justification that it did well in upa    and that many of these projects were imagined  planned and even initiated by it. but it will have to look within to see why these were abandoned  midway  or blocked banned for one reason or the other. the most visible case study is the big infrastructure projects in mumbai. the north south metro  trans harbour link  navi mumbai airport and the coastal road were all planned by the upa. all were denied one clearance or the other and blocked. sad were the big  landmark bridges across the country  especially assam. the bjp simply blew away the cobwebs  picked up the baton  and ran. this is working for it.also read  modi has been smarter   braver on political economy in his   years than manmohan s upa     a new  bhakti cult  of those under     anybody born between      and      became a voter for the first time in this lok sabha election. rich or poor  these are all digital natives. they ve known only one leader  heard just one message  have no reference to the pre google context. most important  they mostly haven t yet gone out in the job market. they ve risen as an unprecedented support base for modi. they like his extroverted style  aggression  hugging foreign leaders  and are more likely to buy into the  after  and even before  modi  the deluge  idea.another important insight into their minds is they detest the entitlement of the dynastic elites. unlike in       they no longer snigger at the mention of rahul gandhi s name. but they ask what he has done so far  what is his experience. the line we heard most often in this campaign was  rahul needs to work hard for some more time  get some experience. modi is self made and experienced  so why look for an alternative as a writer and editor  i eschew the description  bhakt  for modi loyalists  or any such labels for others. in this case  i am consciously describing this young cohort as modi s  bhakti cult  because that is how strong their devotion is  often traversing caste and clan loyalties. again  you can find these views on my instagram page and theprint s. caveat  we found this doesn t apply to muslims  yadavs and jatavs in uttar pradesh.also read  modi s      mantra  forget achhe din  fear terror  pakistan  muslimfinally  a health warning. remember  i told you the four factors that worked for the bjp  and without which its fortunes would have certainly been sunk by its dismal performance on the economy  on the jobs front and the recklessness exemplified by  alice in blunderland  demonetisation. how many seats will these win modi  don t ask me. you have a choice of exit pollsters. all i d stick my neck out to say is that but for these four big factors  he would ve struggled to go past      making a second term almost impossible.i must stop here. in an epoch when the world s best psephologists have been bested by voters in america  trump         brexit  israel and now the australian elections  it would be nuts to venture any further.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




after an election all about modi  it s president kovind who may decide india s fate
text size  a  a by the end of this month  the country is poised to have a new government   after the most acrimonious and keenly contested general elections in the history of independent india. and everyone waits anxiously for    may  when the results of the      elections will be announcedthe question uppermost in the minds of all indians  and also of leaders around the world  is whether current prime minister narendra modi will be able to retain power. the answer is difficult. going by the mood of people and reports from across the country  retaining power is not going to be easy for modi. if he does  it would be only on the basis of increased religious polarisation  faux nationalism and the projected image of a  strong  leader.however  modi seems to be facing a worse scenario than what atal bihari vajpayee faced in      when his government went to polls with the  india shining  slogan. to be fair  india was doing better then   a growing economy  better governance and many good infrastructure schemes.there is  however  no doubt that the bjp is likely to emerge as the single largest party in parliament  even if it gets less than     seats. it is here that modi and his party have the advantage. advantage  presidenthaving selected an unknown leader like ram nath kovind for the post of the president of india  ignoring veterans like lk advani and murli manohar joshi  the bjp leadership will now be looking at kovind to repay the debt.the president can play a big role in deciding which party to invite first to form the government in a scenario where none of the existing coalitions get a clear majority. he can easily go by inviting the leader of the largest party. this convention has also been okayed by the supreme court when the janata dal congress coalition in karnataka had moved the court after governor vajubhai vala decided to invite the leader of the largest party  the bjp  following a fractured mandate in the karnataka assembly elections last year.also read    health warnings you need to know before watching exit poll results     we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowand with the bjp likely to be the largest party even in the lok sabha elections  prime minister modi is expected to receive the president s call first  though the opposition parties may try to cobble together a coalition. upa chairperson sonia gandhi has already invited leaders of all opposition parties to a meeting on the day of the results.     another      will modi  unlike atal bihari vajpayee in       succeed with just the existing nda coalition  it seems unlikely if one goes by his dented image  caste arithmetics in uttar pradesh  and the change in fortunes of the congress as witnessed in assembly elections to three hindi heartland states   madhya pradesh  rajasthan and chhattisgarh. now  the congress has its governments in all these states which were with the bjp going into     .in       after many  scams  during the upa rule and the resultant massive anna hazare led  anti corruption  movement  modi s victory was unbelievable  though all expected the nda to come to power. for the first time since       a political party was able to win an absolute majority on its own       seats  with the nda collecting     seats in total.but five years later  the situation is quite different. modi s record is quite bad as far as the common citizens are concerned. his government failed to correct the economy  could not create the jobs he promised  failed to bring in the black money stashed abroad and end orruption. the economy is in crisis  facing a slowdown. unemployment is at a    year high. businesses are closing down. even corporates are not happy with the modi government.since the  modi wave during his tenure  modi took two big decisions   demonetisation and abolition of the planning commission. demonetisation crippled businesses and affected mostly the poor. modi claimed it was done to flush out black money and cripple terrorists  funding. but the results say otherwise. old big denomination notes were replaced with new ones   without any curb on counterfeit. the creation of niti aayog as a replacement for planning commission was just one of the many examples of a recurring feature of modi s tenure   old congress schemes rehashed and presented as new plans. modi s hasty implementation of the goods and services tax  gst  added to the problems of businesses  besides making products costlier for people. his crop insurance for farmers has been a huge failure while the health insurance for poor is yet to take off.also read  this is the most likely outcome of      lok sabha elections  yogendra yadavabove all  modi s clean image has been dented with allegations of malpractices in the purchase of rafale jets and charges against bjp president amit shah s son in his business. it is clear that the pmo had re negotiated the defence deal  which ended in india paying more  and included anil ambani s firm in the contract instead of the earlier promised state owned hal.in this scenario  modi is facing a huge trust deficit among the voters. the youth who voted for him in the name of development last time  would have found it unlikely to believe in his promises this time. even the ordinary voters  including the minorities  are upset with the government over its aggressive pushing of the bjp rss  brand of hindutva. the priority attached to cow and the hindutva brigade s politics over it have affected the lives of dairy farmers across the hindi heartland and elsewhere.fall in seats certainhowever  the biggest hurdle and challenge for modi is the coming together of the akhilesh yadav led sp and mayawati led bsp in uttar pradesh  which sends the largest number of mps        to parliament. this sp bsp alliance is what started the bjp s decline in assembly and lok sabha bypolls  after winning    seats     with apna dal  in      elections. a deficit of even    seats in up this time will be too much to make up for the party because it is only going to lose seats in other hindi heartland states. the bjp s tally is also going to come down in bihar  jharkhand and maharashtra.in the last election  modi had an ally in chandrababu naidu  telugu desam party  in andhra pradesh. but now naidu is in the opposition camp. similar is the case in telengana  karnataka  tamil nadu and kerala. so  in the south  winning even    seats is difficult.also read  watch out india s next govt  modi regime is leaving behind an extremely weak economymodi s hope was northeast. but the exercise to update national register of citizens  nrc  to detect  foreigners  and the citizenship amendment bill to help hindu refugees in the sub continent have spoiled the bjp s chances for a good show in this region. the bjp s seat tally is also going to come down drastically in jammu and kashmir  punjab  haryana  delhi region   all such states  barring haryana  where the opposition parties hold considerable sway. the bjp had swept both jammu  haryana and delhi in     .in short  the nda is likely to face deficit of at least       seats  and the most deciding states will be up  bihar     seats  and maharashtra     seats .will nationalism bring partners the only hope for modi will be the number of parties the bjp could bring on its side. it had been wooing parties like telangana rashtra samiti  trs  and biju janata dal  odisha   which could win about    odd seats between them  by promising important cabinet posts. but it won t be an easy task.to defeat the bjp strategy  sonia gandhi has called a meeting of all opposition parties on the day of the election results. the congress camp is certain it likely won t win a majority but is is trying to cobble together a coalition like it had in        to defeat a vajpayee led camp  which was sure about its victory.will modi face the same situation like vajpayee  will sonia gandhi  joined by her son and congress president rahul gandhi  again play the trump card and lead the opposition  the congress  which is expecting at least around     seats this time  it had got    seats in        has made it clear that it will not insist on the pm candidate   the thorny issue before the opposition parties. mamata banerjee  mayawati  akhilesh yadav  stalin  dmk   chandrababu naidu  k. chandrashekar rao  trs   deve gowda  janata dal secular   ncp  and the left parties are also expected to win together more than     seats. if the congress gets more than     seats  it can be in the driver s seat to form a larger coalition.modi and the bjp went all out whipping up the nationalist frenzy in a bid to show the prime minister as the only strong leader. the same strategy   of one leader versus the rest   was followed when vajpayee government was seeking re election in     . but people didn t fall into that trap then. will the scenario repeat itself  or will nationalism override other issues  thursday will tell.but if there s one thing that is clear  it s this  india is poised for a larger coalition   either led by the bjp or an amalgam of opposition parties. and the one who will play the key role in if the results put out a hung parliament  it will be the president of india  ram nath kovind.the author is a senior journalist based in new delhi and is currently additional director  communications  at observer research foundation. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




watch out india s next govt  modi regime is leaving behind an extremely weak economy
text size  a  a with more information about the state of the economy coming out  it is clear that the new government will have to kickstart a weakening economy. clearly  the nda is leaving behind an economy with severe problems. industrial output has declined by  .  percent and manufacturing growth has hit a new low in march registering a negative growth of  .  percent. consumer demand is languishing in almost all sectors.it is already worrisome that big car makers like maruti and hyundai have reported that their car sales have plummeted. even motorcycle and scooter sales have fallen in the past few months. slowdown in car sale and low volume of sales in fast moving consumer goods and tourism show that across the board  there are signs of a slowdown. the economic slowdown is now recognized even in official circles as real and gdp growth is likely to be  .   per cent in the fourth quarter  q   of        . non food bank credit has slowed in q  also. capital goods production which registered a contraction of  .  per cent in march is a key source of weakness.the revenue collection through gst has not been as good as expected and there is a rs  .  trillion shortfall when compared with the revised revenue estimate numbers for          hence the government will not have a handful to spend specially when there is strong likelihood of a slippage in fiscal deficit. the centre s revenue growth is only at  .  per cent instead of the budgeted revenue growth of   .  per cent.also read  are      polls proving that modi s political jingoism can overshadow bad news on economy even on essentials like infrastructure  there may be a cutback in public expenditure which is not going to help in the revival of the economy. india has huge infrastructural needs and it must spend on refurbishing and improving infrastructure building new roads  railways  ports and airports to increase competitiveness.the government has acknowledged that export growth has been  tepid  with a wide trade deficit of      billion which the next government will have to reverse. this is because we are losing out in labour intensive exports to countries like bangladesh and vietnam. over the years  india s upper hand in labour intensive exports like textiles  garments and jewellery has been eroding because labour productivity is not rising fast enough. technical progress on the other hand has improved capital productivity dramatically and reduced the relative cost of automation. lack of proper healthcare  skill training and education of labour as compared to countries like china means that the quality of work relative to wages of workers is not improving fast. it is also due to excessive use of contract labour that labour productivity is not rising. unless the financial and labour costs in industry are brought down  there cannot be an increase in india s competitiveness vis   vis our rivals in south east asia and elsewhere.india s dominant exports are now relatively more capital intensive such as auto parts  electronics and pharmaceuticals. labour intensity in organised sector has declined as a result which is bad news for job creation. unless labour intensity in production goes up significantly  the organised sector will not be able to absorb the    million job seekers a year.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  bleak record on economy   the reason modi s bjp has returned to communal politicsmost important is the health of the banking sector. there has been a severe credit crunch for medium and small scale  smes industry because of the problem of npas in the banking sector. india still has among the world s worst stressed asset ratio and soured credit as a share of total loans. according to rbi  this ratio has shrunk to   .  percent in march from   .  per cent in september. public sector banks account for nearly    per cent of npas.the banks have not yet been nursed back to health even though     billion has already been injected over the past two years in the banking system. bank credit growth has somewhat accelerated in the past few months but the aggregate credit growth is still weak.the shadow banking companies or the nbfcs  non banking finance companies  are still in trouble. they have been cash strapped since the il fs crisis making it difficult for smes to borrow from them. the nbfcs provide credit to retail trade also. the smes need capital at reasonable cost. retail market also needs loans to sustain consumption growth and low cars sales is a result of nbfc problems. their borrowings of short term funds from mutual funds has dried up to a great extent due to investors  concerns about the financial health of mutual funds as they hold     billion debt issued by nbfcs. many investors have already exited. the shadow banking companies are also struggling to raise funds from the market but demand for nbfc bonds is dwindling after the il fs fiasco.also read  modi looks to rbi to boost economy before electionsthe doors of wholesale debt market are thus virtually shut and nbfcs are looking at other sources of funds such as external commercial borrowings or selling down assets. even the aaa rated nbfcs are only able to raise funds at a higher cost today paying     basis points more than the market rate.interest rates have been reduced twice in recent times by the rbi  but the  real   minus inflation  interest rate still remains high. steeper interest rate cuts will bring down borrowing costs of nbfcs and corporates. the new government may have to pump prime the economy which means giving both fiscal and monetary stimulus to raise private investment from its current stagnant level. agriculture needs urgent attention also   which is another story.the author is a senior fellow  associate  with observer research foundation s economy and growth programme. views are personal.this article was first published on orf.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




foreign investors don t know if  watchman modi  will be good for them
text size  a  a what donald trump would give to have rallies like narendra modi s  the adulation  the machismo  the beautiful bigness of it all. indian democracy makes american democracy seem quaint  puny and rather un great.the indian prime minister s event in bhadohi  one of three on a recent may day in uttar pradesh  has started late and the heat is sweltering. but there are still more than        people in a field  most of them men. the event surges with testosterone  part open air concert  part cup final  everyone is wearing saffron  like a stadium of dutch soccer fans   and part religious ceremony. god has sent clouds to protect us   announces one warm up act.  do not eat or drink on polling day until you have pressed the lotus button   the faithful are told  referring to the symbol of the bjp that will appear on ballots. another speaker shifts straight to the point   we will destroy pakistan.  the crowd shouts back   long live mother india. and everywhere there is narendra modi. modi masks  modi flags  modi songs  mostly focusing on him as india s chowkidar or watchman. eventually he arrives  like a rock star  by helicopter. the crowd roars at the first glimpse of him. then he is on the stage  telling them that he has made india great again.  don t you feel proud that countries respect india again   he asks.  don t you feel proud that we carried out surgical strikes on pakistan  did you like it when we struck down a satellite in space  did you feel like you did it  that is the power of india.  he pauses.  and what is the reason for this   he asks. modi   the crowd yells back.  no. it is because of you and your support   he responds.economy slipping throughthere is a brief moment of  relative  personal impotence when the watchman  like mick jagger at altamont  pleads with his devotees  for their own safety  not to push toward the stage. but that is the only sign of vulnerability. the real weakness resides with those who stand in modi s way  many of whom are dismissed with trumpian nicknames  starting with  the dynast   which is what modi calls rahul gandhi  the leader of the congress party.yet amid all this machismo  the subject about which you would expect the watchman to be both most boastful and most watchful is largely absent  the economy. india is now the world s fastest growing big economy. but modi makes only a few references to bhadohi s carpet industry  one of the largest in south asia. this may be because he knows the economy is still not growing quite fast enough to create the   million jobs a month india s growing population needs  or it may be because he wants to concentrate his energies elsewhere in his next term.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe noweither of those explanations should scare the business people and foreign investors who trust modi. this year  overseas investors have bought about     billion of indian equities  the most across emerging asia after china  on optimism that the watchman will retain power  without bothering to find out much about what he might do.in fact  india s long  rolling election  whose result will finally be announced on may     deserves far more attention than the west is giving it. consider this  even if modi loses  he will still probably win    million more votes  the bjp got about     million votes in       than u.s. presidential candidates donald trump and hillary clinton garnered together in     . he will also  paradoxically  represent one of the world s three largest muslim populations  even if almost none of them vote for him . that this election is something of a battle for india s soul   the inclusive  chaotic tradition that congress and gandhi represent versus modi s tougher hindu nationalism   only adds to its importance.and india matters   not just as the world s other great engine of economic growth but also as the other rising power in asia  with thousands of soldiers along its contested borders with china and pakistan. amid all the words printed and earnest cogitation in the west about the nationalist ambitions of xi jinping s china  the watchman has been given a pass. and his influence will only grow. according to the united nations  india will overtake china as the world s most populous country by        the year that could also mark the end of modi s second term.modi s effect on indiait is worth acknowledging both the good things modi has done and the bad things he has not done since he came to power in     . back then  he swept aside a stale  corrupt congress led government on the promise of economic reform and a record as an efficient  business friendly chief minister in the state of gujarat. indian voters  perhaps correctly  ignored critics  including this writer  who worried about modi s divisiveness  symbolized by a      riot in gujarat that left       muslims dead.since then  modi has run a much cleaner government than congress did. he has ushered in a series of economic reforms  notably a simplification of its tax system. india s infrastructure has improved  there are new roads and  crucially  many more toilets in villages. he has also been less divisive than many feared. true     muslims have been lynched  mainly for allegedly consuming beef or transporting cattle   the press has been bullied  with anti modi editors removed  and pakistan remains vilified. but in the gruesome arithmetic of indian sectarianism  none of these things seem especially exceptional.however  elections are about the future not the past   and here modi s shift away from the economy seems part of a trend. six of his nine main economic reforms were launched in the first half of his five year reign  they have slowed in recent years. the bjp manifesto is short on new economic ideas while congress s is unusually dynamic  with some spotting the hand of raghuram rajan  the reformist former head of the central bank. the bjp campaign  like modi s speech  has focused on nationalism. the party is even running a candidate who is under indictment on terrorism charges relating to a      bomb blast in a muslim area that killed six people.modi s supporters have their answers ready. yes  he is stirring up islamophobia  again   but what politician doesn t  he doesn t want to make a lot of promises about economic reform  because this time he will probably govern in a coalition with another party. eventually  he will further simplify the national sales tax and push ahead with land acquisition reform. despite what he says  the watchman s focus is really china  not pakistan.will a second term for modi work for india all this leaves two questions. the first is  will it work at the polls  congress is certainly a more potent force than last time. tactically  it has formed local alliances that should hurt modi.  for instance  in      the bjp swept the board in uttar pradesh  winning almost all    seats because the anti modi vote was split  this time around congress is informally supporting local parties.  rahul gandhi has been joined on the campaign trail by his sister  priyanka  who looks like their all conquering grandmother indira  any aspiring politician should watch a video where priyanka calmly picks up a cobra . congress s manifesto shrewdly includes a basic income for the poor of        rupees  about         a year.what s more  congress s main pitch is that a second modi term would be too extreme for a country that wants to remain secular and united.  india is like an ocean   gandhi argues.  it doesn t like big waves.  and there is some truth to this. the previous bjp government served only one full term  and gandhi s own father  rajiv  was ejected in      when he turned authoritarian. plus  some businesspeople who backed modi last time around privately think that a congress alliance  with rajan as finance minister or even prime minister  would be best.the fact that these views are private reflects not just their fear of modi  but also their assumption that he will win. the bjp has the superior organization  and it is outspending congress by a large margin. it also has the more energized base. the best guess is that modi will be back  but possibly forced to share power in a coalition with other nationalists.at least this seems to be what markets and investors are hoping for  better the devil you know  goes the argument. but do the traders in new york and london really know narendra modi this leads to the second question  what would a second modi term look like  it is likely to be more divisive. across india  minorities are frightened   not just muslims but christians. other liberties are at risk  too. if you want a gauge of india s press freedom you need only open a newspaper  the bjp has banned maps that show where the actual border is  you can only show where india thinks it should be. that is fake geography of a sort that even autocracies like china spurn.and there remains the economy. under modi  india has begun to catch up to china  but it is still years behind  in terms of jobs  education  health and  increasingly  the condition of the environment. beijing is moving away from coal much quicker than delhi. and there is the desperate demand of those millions flooding into the workforce. one study put the unemployment rate at a    year high. that is a little unfair because it does not include the millions of poor indians who have livelihoods but not formal employment. yet the pressure to create jobs is there  and so is the pressure to improve basic education   absenteeism is still rampant in state schools.as the saffron clad young men stream out of the dusty field in bhadohi  some of them still chanting the watchman s name and yelling for pakistan s humiliation  the thought remains that they need something to do in between rallies. that means much more dynamic economic reform  not less. at the very least  foreigners should be praying that modi picks up where he started in       not where he left off in     .   bloomberg.john micklethwait is editor in chief of bloomberg news.also read  indian companies break past records  log     billion in foreign investment dealssubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




a quick tour through bengal  why the state doesn t need amit shah   modi s lectures
text size  a  a the destruction of the bust of ishwar chandra vidyasagar in kolkata has hit a raw nerve with bengalis. as the bjp and the tmc continue to blame each other over the statue  it is time to examine if the charge of  minority appeasement   so often thrown at the state government  sticks.to look closely at bengal would reveal a truth that runs counter flow to the bjp s claims that mamata banerjee does not allow durga pujas or let people say  jai shri ram  in her state.also read  vidyasagar statue vandalism in bengal isn t just about ideology. it s a tmc bjp power wardurga pujait is the state government that has been trying very hard to get unesco to award cultural heritage status to the durga puja festival. in size  durga puja is the second largest hindu festival in india  after the kumbh mela. but the kumbh mela is held once every    years  while the durga puja is held annually.the mamata banerjee government introduced the red road durga puja parade  where the best of the idols pass in a rio carnival style procession  replete with musicians and dancers  down red road before heading for final immersion. this clever marketing of a centuries old festival has injected new life  and money  into it by allowing the public and tourists to see the idols and fanfare without ploughing through the lakhs of people out on the streets during the festival.also read  everyone knows not to take on mamata banerjee  like modi   amit shah did  on her home turfchristmas festivitiesthe street partying isn t restricted to hindus  the park street christmas festival is now the largest such christian festival in asia. the entire street  in the very heart of the city  is illuminated with santa clauses and other nativity themed decorations  carols and songs are played through speakers. there are stalls selling foods and drinks in park street during the festivities.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhalfway down the street  in allen park  a    day long christmas festival is the main attraction. odd as it may seem  but in a testament to bengal s diversity  the kolkata police band features as one of the main attractions  playing christmas carols and songs.a unique roada bustling road cuts through the hot and claustrophobic chaos of kolkata s business sector in burrabazaar. called brabourne road  it is possibly the only road in the world to have a place of worship for every major religion of the world.the most religiously and culturally remarkable of these are the three jewish synagogues  which has had a muslim family as caretakers for four generations now. around the world  muslims and jews have seen animosity  but here in kolkata  they have been living happily alongside each other for almost two centuries.a walk along brabourne road and its periphery reveals more. this relatively small area holds a catholic cathedral  again  portuguese with a nautical theme   and the oldest christian church in the city   the armenian church. at the top end of the road is a scottish church  and dotted around that area you will also find over a dozen chinese temples  a buddhist sangha  and on a tram track laden road branching off  the majestic nakhoda masjid.one of the narrow side lanes holds a heartbreaking sight  the crumbling ruins of a parsi fire temple  which is falling apart due to a dispute between the owners over future use  while shops selling gaudy chinese lights have encroached the grounds of the complex. the involvement of the government is restricted to a signboard telling the story of the temple. needless to say  the entire neighbourhood also has several mandirs  jain temples and gurdwaras  all built by the traders who found the area ripe for business  as traffic coming from the busiest railway station in india   howrah   and goods from both the river and the bus terminus  have to pass burrabazaar to enter the city.also read  ram temple built by hindus  muslims  christians   sikhs is bengal s answer to bjp politicslittle europewhen the mighty ganga cuts a path around the western fringe of the city  it passes bengal s hooghly district. this channel to the bay of bengal  and thus the world s oceans  brought the armenians  dutch  french  portuguese and the east india company  through whom the british would turn the  chance directed  chance erected  assortment of three villages into their beating heart   calcutta. along with the traders  and looters  came their religions  food  languages and cultures.it was this european assortment that gave a smattering of townships a new  and well deserved name    little europe on the hooghly .the portuguese  once a formidable maritime force  settled in bandel and built a basilica there. this sprawling campus was funded by a portuguese captain whose ship sank with the crew. he prayed to mother mary and discovered that his crew had survived  all clinging to the ship s mast.although commonly known as bandel church  it is  in fact  a basilica as it has a christian relic   a piece of the veil of mary. the armenians too have a relic at their church in chinsurah  their own little township. this is the right hand of st john the baptist  said to be the hand that baptised jesus in the river jordan  thus heralding the beginning of christianity.in the late   th century  at the half moon like curve of the hooghly  the french took control of chand nagar or chandannagar  as it is known today. the rapacious and shrewd frenchman joseph dupleix took the town from a few villages to one of the wealthiest on the hooghly. dupleix s influence was from the americas to myanmar and down to puducherry  where a statue of him still stands.also read  narendra modi  thank you very much but durga has ten arms and can look after herselfvivekananda to amartya senthe land that stretches from the world s largest mangrove to the himalayas  the land of philosopher swami vivekananda  the monastic ramakrishna math  the charitable mother teresa  the reformist raja ram mohan roy  the oscar winner satyajit ray  the nobel laureate amartya sen  the revolutionary netaji subhas chandra bose and the literary giant rabindranath tagore needs no lectures on hinduism or communal harmony from amit shah or narendra modi.the author is an ex scotland yard officer based out of london and kolkata  and works as a historian and writer. his writings focus on governance  policing and politics.this article has been updated to reflect changes.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




everyone knows not to take on mamata banerjee  like modi   amit shah did  on her home turf
text size  a  a only the very brave or the extremely foolish would dare to take on west bengal chief minister mamata banerjee on the battleground she knows best   the streets and bylanes of her state.it is on the streets of kolkata that bjp president amit shah attempted to take her on  unleashing a chain of events that saw the destruction of the bust of revered bengali social reformer ishwar chandra vidyasagar and the election commission curtailing campaigning  but only after prime minister narendra modi s rallies were completed.but it is on the streets of kolkata that mamata defeated the veteran communist somnath chatterjee in        his only electoral defeat. it is here that didi emerged as the bengali joan of arc  as india today famously described her  in       after cpi m  cadres made the first of their many mistakes and assaulted her  causing her to bleed profusely from the head  which needed    stitches. it is here again that she has held countless dharnas  rallies  fasts and protests to ensure the defeat  after    years  of communist rule.a lot of blood has been spilt along the way. hers  that of her supporters  and of the communist cadres who once controlled every institution in west bengal. for mamata banerjee  once dismissed pejoratively as  that girl   with her political actions dubbed as  tantrums   intimidation brings out that famous clich  about her   the inner bengal tigress.also read  amit shah has more than rattled mamata banerjee in bengalher combination of insulting oratorical flourishes and her cadres  often violent way of showing their support has created a power edifice in west bengal that the bjp may well find echoes of. if there is one leader who can match prime minister narendra modi in coining derogatory descriptors and in signalling to the party when it should unshackle its raw power  it is banerjee.and therein lies the contradiction. for those with short memories and shorter attention spans  it must be a bitter irony that the former general secretary of the youth congress i  and founder of trinamool congress had a cosy alliance with the bjp at one point  which even saw her being part of the atal bihari vajpayee government in       until she quit over the tehelka expos  in     . at that time  her main enemy was the left and as she said so famously in       she felt it was wrong that her former party president sitaram kesri felt that the bjp should remain a pariah.  must we stick the communal label on the millions who vote for the bjp   she had asked then.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmamata didi knew much before modi that politics is not a tea party. it is a war for the hearts and minds of voters where everything is possible. one only has to look at her scorched earth battle for singur in      and then nandigram in       which saw the high profile exit of the tata nano project  to understand that. wholly useful at that point in helping her oust the marxists  it has also forever cast a shadow on her efforts since then to re industrialise her state. the idea she sold  of maa  mati and manush  mother  earth and people   was seductive and when she came to power in       it was going to be a new cultural renaissance  a poriborton  change   for west bengal.not all the promises have been fulfilled. after a first term dedicated to social welfare initiatives  like the award winning kanyashree scheme that subsidises young women entrepreneurs  banerjee focused on building infrastructure  restoring industrial development and creating job opportunities in her second term. she was at the forefront of the battle against demonetisation  vowing on    november       at a rally in kolkata   today i am taking a pledge. whether i die or live  i ll remove pm modi from politics. journalist sumit mitra who has been writing about her since the time she was in the chhatra parishad  is underwhelmed by her performance as chief minister   the state became notorious for its anti business stance in most of the leftist rule. mamata tried to lure investors  but her party  which is made of former foot soldiers of the left  now depends on extortionist gangs. unemployment and violence follow a cyclical pattern. mamata is still holding out because national parties have vanished from bengal  and there is no regional alternative. those who like to extol the virtues of a singleton prime minister  may well want to examine mamata didi s long and winding road to power as well.also read  until just a few years ago  mamata   modi actually liked and praised each otherthe daughter of a refugee  mamata paid her university fees by teaching at a municipal school for girls. a novelist and a painter  she wears her simplicity well  in a spotless white cotton sari and white hawai chappal. trim and fit  after a daily bout on the treadmill  she ensured her party was one of the early adopters of technology in campaigning  using facebook  twitter and whatsapp with great skill.a daughter of the earth as much as the prime minister is a son of the soil  she can match him invective for invective  barb for barb  punch for punch. whether it is describing narendra modi and amit shah as the  dhokla mafia  or modi as  expiry babu   she spares no effort to embarrass or insult them. if modi s bugbear is the lutyen s media  hers is the national media  which she feels gives him a free pass.she s been chief minister twice  seven time mp  two time mla  and union minister in three governments.she is serious about forming an opposition led government in the country and it was evident not merely in the regional leaders who attended her      swearing in   among them lalu yadav  farooq abdullah  akhilesh yadav  arvind kejriwal  kanimozhi  and tdp leader thota narasimhan.also read  modi shah s poison has met its match in mamata banerjee s poisontheir one goal  she says  is to remove modi.  modi is not fit to even be block president   she said in a recent interview on the campaign trail.  i am ashamed to call him prime minister   she added.it has been enough to enrage pm modi who has talked in his rallies of the  bua bhatija sarkar   referring to banerjee s nephew  mp abhishek banerjee. but her aim is clear  a united india government to ensure the  ouster  of narendra modi. will she be prime minister  she calls herself a little worker. but as her career shows  that little worker can make enormous change.dinesh trivedi  trinamool mp  who has known her for over    years  says what makes her special is her  courage of conviction  fearlessly fighting for the rights of the common people  especially the poor  and standing tall for democracy. she never gives up or compromises  come what may . on may     this may well be proved once again.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




making mayawati india s prime minister in      will fix its casteist past and present
text size  a  a it is for the first time in    years since independence that a dalit leader  mayawati  is also emerging as a contender for india s top post at the centre in delhi. it is also for the first time that a big leader of backward classes from the electorally most crucial state is backing a dalit for the prime minister s post. yes  it s samajwadi party president akhilesh yadav  who has openly supported the candidature of bahujan samaj party chief mayawati.the support for mayawati isn t only from the top leadership  common people belonging to backward castes too have mobilized themselves to see mayawati coronated as the prime minister. in uttar pradesh  the combined equation of dalit backwards minority communities wishes to see mayawati in the pm s role. mayawati herself has added fuel to their wishes by indicating that she may contest the lok sabha by election from ambedkar nagar  if all things go well . even though who finally sits in the prime minister s office will be decided by the      election results and political equations after that  it s nevertheless a big deal that a dalit leader is being seen and spoken about as a contender for the post of prime minister during a lok sabha election.bjp projected modi as a  backward actually  just like the dalits  others backward classes  obcs  too have long wished to see an obc leader sit in the pm s chair. the bharatiya janata party  bjp  sensed this desire when ahead of the      lok sabha elections  the party projected narendra modi as an obc leader and achieved great success.but while narendra modi went on to sit in the delhi s chair with the help of the obcs and an obc identity  he failed to meet the expectations the community had from him. in fact  modi  during his tenure  greatly affected the interests of the obc community.also read  who trolls mayawati on twitter and what it says about indiansfrom the central cabinet to the pmo  leaders and officials from the backward communities did not get adequate representation. apart from this  the modi government ended reservation under the guise of privatisation  and forced the backward communities to question his intent and caste credentials when they faced discrimination in employment opportunities. modi s anti backward image was further accentuated by the roster system controversy for appointments in central universities.doubts over modi being a  backward mayawati  akhilesh yadav and rashtriya janata dal leader tejashwi yadav have repeatedly said that modi is a  fake obc  or  an obc only on paper . it has also been alleged that modi is not an obc by birth and his caste was inducted in the obc list through manipulation. in the ongoing lok sabha election  modi s caste has also emerged as an election issue.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowactually  the constant neglect of the obc communities by the modi government has led to the formation of this belief among the obc classes that the bjp has imposed an anti backward leader as an obc leader. the obcs  hurt by this deception  have now turned to mayawati with a new sense of hope.the obc communities realise that mayawati is a leader belonging to the deprived class and that the dalit society itself is fighting for their share of representation in the country. the backward castes  principal fight too is for its share in the power system. and so  the backwards have begun to realise that if both they and the dalits are fighting the same fight  then they will have to come together for the cause. the backward groups are also figuring out that only mayawati can raise the issue of backwards  representation in the power structure because she is already fighting for the cause on her community s behalf.dalits who managed to reach at the topdalits ask why a leader from the dalit community cannot become the prime minister of india   when k.r. narayanan can become the president  justice balakrishnan appointed as the chief justice of india  and babu jagjivan ram as the deputy prime minister of india.also read  the signalling of mulayam mayawati grand union   water  blessings and the central chaircrowning moment for mayawati india has been independent for more than    years  but still no leader from the community whose share in india s population is   .  per cent has gone on to become the prime minister. a consensus on mayawati for the post of pm will embolden the trust of the deprived sections and classes in indian democracy  and further strengthen india s democratic roots.at the same time  india would be able to communicate to the global community that india s democracy is in no way weaker or inferior to the united states . when the majoritarian us whites can accept barak obama   a leader of the black minority community   as their president  then india too can accept mayawati   a leader from one of the country s most backward and deprived sections   as the prime minister. by electing obama as the president  the us  white community showed their humane side. it is a test now for the savarna  upper caste  community of india. can india s upper castes show the same liberality and generosity by supporting mayawati for the post of india s prime minister the author is the editor of bharat janmat  a youtube channel. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




the tina factor   flailing opposition means modi will win again  writes arun jaitley
text size  a  a as the seventh phase of election approaches to closure  the groundswell in favour of prime minister modi is becoming stronger. except in the last few days  not one political analyst had foreseen the velocity of this groundswell even in a state like bengal. the largest size of the prime minister s public rallies have been in bengal.the positive reasons for the prime minister s acceptability has been his decisiveness  integrity and performance  his delivery of resources to the poor  and his security doctrine which has been a game changer. the nda s strength has been a complete absence of any confusion about leadership or programme. there is an absolute consensus.the not so positive reason for the prime minister s high acceptability levels is the absence of any cogent or coherent alternative. conventionally  it used to be referred to as the  tina  factor. this effectively means that  there is no alternative. if the opposition is giving vague assurances of an alternative  the same is either too scary or absolutely frightening. the opposition could not forge an alliance in several key states. they do not call a meeting of different opposition parties for the obvious fear that many will not attend the meeting. the common thread which brings them together is negativism   to get rid of one person. they have no agreement on either a leader or programme. they are a completely fractured opposition which could not come together before or during the election.who will believe their assurance that they can come together after the election  they are institution wreckers. they do not allow parliament to function. they attack and intimidate judges.now election commission is their next target. the attack on the evms and the election commission is an advance alibi for defeat on the   rd may      . their leaders represent temperamental mavericks  some highly corrupt and many   a governance disaster. the electorate wonders  if they can ever provide a cogent alternative. past history belies the longevity of such opportunistic and fragile combinations.to the electorate  they provide an absolutely frightening scenario. i have long argued that aspirational societies look for a better tomorrow. they are averse to suicidal choices. the frightening and scary scenario that the opposition promises will be responsible for its rout. this consolidates the groundswell in favour of modi.also read not opposition unity  but bjp s critical mini gathbandhans stole the thunderthis article was republished from arun jaitley s blog.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




dear pm modi  you re spending too much time on twitter and have got the media wrong
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi routinely complains that journalists are biased against him and his party. he also says they are soft on the opposition  especially the congress and the gandhi family. he has now used a media interview  one in the continuing series in the slog over phase of these elections  to articulate his view in some detail.in the very detailed interview to the indian express last week  modi made the following main points about journalists   they might pretend to be neutral  but they aren t.  good and fair journalists must be neutral.  in the past  editors journalists could conceal their predilections. editors always used to be anonymous  speaking rarely  if at all  at seminars. now they speak all the time. today  with most of them chattering away on social media  mainly twitter  they are exposed.  they are complicit in collectively maligning his image  a part of the  khan market gang .as someone who s been around in journalism for more than a bit  i am happy to join this argument with him. i break down my response in seven short points.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowjournalistic neutrality is an impossibility. it is also an uncalled for demand. living beings  whether human  or dogs and cats  will always have a view on any situation or issue. what journalists can  and should do  while having their opinions  is to employ professional tools and tests to make their reporting objective and fair.social media  especially twitter  is a great new medium for journalists to multiply their reach and impact. it can also be a trap and pm modi is right to say that when journalists make their preferences  likes and dislikes so public  how do you trust them with their editorial fairness. it s a problem and newsrooms are learning to deal with. in the us  legacy giants such as the new york times and washington post have greatly strengthened their social media policies  placing limitations on their journalists publishing their personal views if they reveal their bias. theprint s code of ethics allows its full time journalists to write on social media anything that would also be publishable on the edited platform. for example  you cannot call somebody a mass murderer or thief on social media or in public speeches if you don t have the facts to say so in a story.it is incorrect to say editors  views were not known until the arrival of social media. this varies between individuals and eras. even in the past  many eminent editors such as frank moraes  b.g. verghese  girilal jain  arun shourie  prabhash joshi and rajendra mathur  i am limiting myself to languages i read  have shared their views generously and without hypocrisy or pretence of anodyne neutrality with the readers.the pm is unfair to the vast majority of indian media which dotingly supports him today by insinuating that journalists are mostly opposed to him. if you watch your tv channels at prime time  all  except the odd exception  mostly sing his praises and keep tough questions only for the opposition. he has the biggest media fan club for a leader i have seen since     . again  barring a couple of exceptions  the big dailies in most languages do not give him any discomfort.some media still questions and criticises him. but he is not the only leader in power to face this. every leader does  as did dr manmohan singh  particularly in his second term. the same time magazine  which has now caused consternation by calling modi india s  divider in chief   had featured singh on the cover with the headline   the underachiever . the pm mentioned two specific issues from the upa period  the formation of the national advisory council  nac  which could overrule the cabinet and rahul gandhi tearing that ordinance. both had drawn criticism. you might want to google me with  nac  extra constitutional  and  upa s auto immune self destruction . the lesson is  when you are in power  be prepared to face the heat. or at least some heat.his characterisation of his critics  where we presume he combines journalists and liberal intellectuals  as  khan market gang  is the most interesting highlight. it is as if that tiny old market is to  devious  lutyens  delhi what balakot is to  terrorist  pakistan  a hideout of malcontents. my submission is  irritating though he may find this pesky lot  he greatly exaggerates their power and influence. he does indeed flatter them. it also shows he is reading too much twitter. he talked about reading a collection of    tweets by a journalist intellectual and figuring out his reality. that  prime minister  is too much time spent on twitter. you must have more important stuff to read.and finally  where does it leave us journalists  i started working in early      with a tiny delhi based weekly called democratic world. we had created a home ad for the magazine that read   the left thinks we are right  the right thinks we are left  so we must be doing something right.  i d say  follow the same view. keep your opinions and predilections close  no problem. just be professional enough that you can convince your audiences of your objectivity. we are mere journalists. we aren t political scientists. and definitely not political philosophers. what we wish for  can t be a part of our journalism.so  don t worry about your audience s minds getting prejudiced by the abuse you face on social media. because it won t happen. your audiences are smart. and if you so wish  you can update that old ad copy for modern times   the left thinks we are right  the right thinks we are left  so we get trolled by both. a thick skin is as much a professional necessity in journalism now as a clean nose and that erect spine.also read  modi s hindutva  .  written on varanasi walls  temple restoration  not mosque demolitionsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




before last phase polling  a determined modi has rattled two key rivals   mamata   mayawati
text size  a  a as the election campaign moves into the last phase  prime minister narendra modi has invoked issues both from the past  as well as from parts of india where elections are over to fight elections in other parts.modi s new tagline over the last week has been   hua toh hua  what has happened  has happened .  it s a phrase dripping with sarcasm  and he is using it to tear into the opposition.he stops at nothing. he is determined to win. the long  seven phase campaign has helped him on both counts. let me explain how.also read  is modi correct in saying media is biased against him in his pre election interviews in bathinda  punjab  modi invoked congressman sam pitroda s ridiculous remark regarding the      sikh riots   which took place in the wake of indira gandhi s assassination and in which more than       people were killed   and asked if this was the kind of party punjab wanted to elect.in kushinagar and deoria in eastern uttar pradesh  which goes to the polls on    may  modi brought up the gangrape of a    year old woman in alwar  rajasthan   the state had already gone to the polls on    april and   may and is now ruled by the congress.taunting bahujan samajwadi party  bsp  leader mayawati with the infamous  guest house incident  of       when samajwadi party workers had hurled sexual abuses at the dalit leader  modi asked why she was continuing to support the congress government in rajasthan.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now hua to hua   modi asked. is punjab going to forgive the congress for       should mayawati be shedding  crocodile tears  for the alwar gang rape survivor  when she was herself abused by her current alliance partner  the samajwadi party in an election marked by several low blows  this one fell beneath the pale. who reminds a woman of the trauma she has suffered and buried deep in an effort to forget  all for a few votes also read  modi shah s poison has met its match in mamata banerjee s poisonprime minister modi isn t giving up. he leaves no stone unturned  excavates every wound  opens up every laceration. his ambition for power is unmatched.certainly  modi knows that both punjab and uttar pradesh are two states where the so called  wind  or visible undercurrent in his favour may slow down. the argument that punjab s congress chief minister amarinder singh could eat up the bjp akali dal alliance for breakfast  while the unbeatable caste combination of the samajwadi party and the bsp in uttar pradesh could halt modi s juggernaut is valid  and modi knows that.that is why he is throwing everything he has into this last phase. some of the mud may not stick   like the charge that rajiv gandhi used the ins virat warship to holiday with his italian in laws  several retired naval officers have denied the accusation   but some of it  may. certainly  there s no harm trying.what is also clear this week is modi s anger against what he called the  khan market gang  in an interview with the indian express. by this he means the entitled  self serving  dynastic  largely english speaking lot that feels most at home in the watering holes of an upscale market in the heart of delhi  incidentally  named after dr khan  the elder brother of khan abdul ghaffar khan  the  frontier gandhi    people whose watches are set to london  new york and paris  rather than bhopal  begusarai and bathinda.unfortunately for him  amarinder singh comfortably belongs to both worlds   and despite his amiable pakistani companion  he has never hesitated to call out the skullduggery of pakistan s isi and army. amarinder will throw everything he has into bathinda and the rest of punjab s    lok sabha seats in an effort to arrest modi s caravan.also read  if modi fails to come back to power  it ll be because of himself  not the oppositionin this last phase  punjab  eastern uttar pradesh and west bengal hold the key. whichever alliance wins these remaining    seats could sit on the throne of delhi. modi knows this and so do mayawati and mamata banerjee.mayawati struck back against modi s invocation of her trauma   hua toh hua    he had taunted her  monday  saying up s women didn t want their husbands to go near prime minister modi as the women feared  that like modi they might also abandon their wives .the bizarre comment indicated that modi s barb had hit home. mayawati is not the type of person to be unsettled by ordinary men  but in a campaign defined by unseemly comments  this one certainly has. just like mamata banerjee who refused to let bjp president amit shah s chopper land monday  for no ostensible reason   shah is now doing a roadshow.at least for the moment  modi has succeeded in throwing off two key rivals. less than a week remains for both women to get back up and fight him. but as the mahabharata always reminds us  all is fair in love  war and politics.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




 modi s ouster on    may will be india s fitting reply to the most foul mouthed pm 
text size  a  a i think i have discovered why narendra modi loathes jawaharlal nehru so much. nehru had a degree in natural sciences from the university of cambridge. it made him realise that to pull india and indians out of superstition  from what gurudev rabindranath tagore called  the dreary desert sands of dead habit   modern india must cultivate a  scientific temper   an expression that drives sanghis nuts because they like to believe the  udan khatolas  of mythology were the earliest f   s to be invented by hindus  and that hindu plastic surgery  not a transplant operation  is what led to an elephant s head surmounting lord ganesh. both these stunningly illiterate claims come from the mouth of none less than the prime minister of our country  whose acquaintance with higher education has gone no further than lying about degrees from delhi and gujarat universities that he never got and who can obviously not tell a scientific proposition from a  dhokla .that  in itself  would not matter. for neither indira gandhi nor rajiv gandhi had a university degree and yet made good  perhaps even great  prime ministers. statesmanship is not a civil services exam and it is not necessary to go to a university to reach the pinnacle of government. perhaps the most famous example of that is winston churchill. but why lie about one s educational qualifications   or lack of them  unless  of course  such lying is a compulsive psychological disorder.we have just heard from our prime minister  yes  he is the nation s pm for another ten days or so  that he ordered the indian air force to strike at balakot despite heavy cloud cover because while senior air force officers were trembling their knees pleading for postponement of the strike till the weather improved  he  modi  thumped his    inch chest and saw that heavy cloud cover was actually good for the indian air force because pakistani radar would not be able to penetrate thick black clouds.also read   i am very much alive   mani shankar aiyar tells trolls claiming he  died in balakot this is to insult our brave airmen and  above all  the chief of air staff. not one of them was so ignorant of the fact that radar is not a telescope whose vision can be clouded over. radar is used precisely because  whatever the weather conditions  it can pinpoint incoming aircraft. did modi take his senior most air force officers for fools that he could trot out such ridiculous unscientific rubbish before them  and were they so pusillanimous that they dared not correct such a vacuous prime minister this insult to our defence forces compounds another insult directed at senior officers of the navy  who were involved in december      in transporting rajiv gandhi  then prime minster of india  and his good lady from off shore thiruvananthapuram to the lakshadweep islands to attend the island development authority meeting. admiral laxminarayan ramdas  then flag officer commanding in chief  southern command  and later chief of naval staff  has gone on record certifying that only rajiv gandhi and sonia gandhi were on board ins viraat when it sailed to lakshadweep. three other very senior navy officers   admirals arun prakash  madanjit singh and vinod pasricha  who had personal knowledge of the voyage because they were involved in the arrangements  including one who later become chief of naval staff   have publicly affirmed that there were no foreigners on board the aircraft carrier.if after four of the senior most naval officers have said so  does not decency demand that modi withdraw the allegations he has made about rajiv using the indian navy as a  personal taxi  to ferry  foreigners  to a holiday on one of the islands  bangaram  how dare he cast aspersions on the patriotism of such distinguished veterans of our defence forces  either modi is lying or these four senior  if retired  naval officers are lying. how could two of them have been promoted to the rank of chief of naval staff   the highest post that a naval officer could aspire to   if their record had been blotted by their allowing unauthorised foreigners to be on board a naval ship bristling with the latest in warfare technology we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  mani shankar aiyar s  neech  remark is hardly the game changer bjp was looking formodi needs to be warned that he is guilty of anti national activity in trying to ride on the sacrifices of our army and crpf martyrs in a dirty election campaign  of defaming the indian air force by portraying them as complaisant idiots in his scientific illiteracy  and the indian navy as being packed at its highest echelons with traitors who would acquiesce in unauthorised foreigners being allowed to board a top of the line defence vessel.but then  why bother  modi will  in any case  be ousted by the people of india on    may. that would be a fitting end to the most foul mouthed prime minister this country has seen or is likely to see. remember how i described him on   december       was i not prophetic the author is a congress leader. views are personal.this article was originally published in rising kashmir and is being reproduced here with permission from the author.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why even     seats for bjp can keep the stress level high for modi and shah this election
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi and his bharatiya janata party s president amit shah must have felt let down by a sudden bolt from the blue. or rather from the saffron. ram madhav  a rashtriya swayamsevak sangh ideologue and the bjp s national general secretary publicly implied that the ruling party may not get a full majority on its own and will have to depend on coalition partners to return to power after results of the ongoing lok sabha elections are announced    may.both modi and amit shah have been publicly maintaining that  phir ek bar   there will be a  modi sarkar    with around     sears to the bjp. party leader nitin gadkari  too  has stated that he was  not with the opinion of ram madhav   claiming that the bjp will get a  clear majority     more than     .what nobody can comprehend is why ram madhav would make such a provocative statement just a fortnight before the actual results are out. some pollsters have been giving the bjp led national democratic alliance  nda  a clear majority  although quite a few psephologists and some senior journalists have maintained that the results  if anything  are  unpredictable . but still  why did ram madhav concede a setback so early also read  the traditional bjp voter is upper caste  upper class   a staunch believer in hindu prideclearly  ram madhav is suggesting that even the national democratic alliance  nda  will fall short of majority. therefore post poll alliance looks inevitable. there are many people in the political and stock market who are trying to decode what ram madhav may have actually meant.trouble for modiin a scenario where post poll alliance is a necessity for the bjp  its allies in the nda could demand a replacement for modi. with that in mind  one may concur that ram madhav may be hinting at such a change. if so  then ram madhav is lending credence to the buzz from rumour bazaar that even the rss is not keen on modi continuing in the prime minister s role  which further explains why the names of nitin gadkari and rajnath singh have begun to circulate again.it is unlikely that narendra modi  amit shah and national security advisor ajit doval are not aware of the buzz. they too must have kept their plan b ready for any eventuality. if neo nationalism  coupled with social engineering  caste configuration  mainly in uttar pradesh  give the bjp a three per cent swing  then the bjp can win    plus seats in the electorally crucial state. with    odd seats in uttar pradesh  the predictions by some journalists that the bjp could win     lok sabha seats would hold true. in that case  it would not be difficult for modi led bjp to form the government   albeit with the help of its current alliance partners. others will come forward if the numbers are strong for the bjp nda.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowlessons from the pastin       atal bihari vajpayee could not get the sufficient number from bjp s alliance partners to stay in power and had to quit after holding the pm s chair for only    days. the bjp was the single largest party with     seats  with three allies   shiv sena  shiromani akali dal and haryana vikas manch. after vajpayee led government collapsed  hd deve gowda  then with janata dal  formed the government with the congress providing support from the outside.the moment congress withdrew support to hd deve gowda s government  he too had to quit. deve gowda s successor inder kumar gujral similarly could not survive in the prime minister s office for long  as the congress withdrew support to him as well. both deve gowda s and ik gujral s governments were  anti bjp and anti congress .also read  is rss wary of modi shah  a quiet  support  to raj thackeray in maharashtra signals sothese two experiences with the indian polity show that unless there is the direct participation by either of the two national parties   the bjp and the congress   a  government  at the centre cannot sustain itself for long. one of the main reasons why the congress support is seen by some parties with suspicion is that it has not let a regime where it was not the main player live through its term.it is against this backdrop that the      lok sabha elections were fought. the rejuvenated bjp under atal bihari vajpayee could gather as many as    friendly parties ready with support. although the bjp secured only     seats  the government survived for the next    months  and came to an end when maverick j jayalalithaa of the aiadmk withdrew support. aiadmk s    members of parliament and the bahujan samaj party of mayawati  and the lok dal led by chautalas too voted against the vajpayee government. the fall by just one vote was dramatic and rather unexpected.not just about numbersif the bjp manages     plus seats on    may  then with hard bargain and intense horse trading  modi can continue as the prime minister. however  there are many commentators and pundits who say that he will not be able to become pm because of resistance from even current nda partners  forget cobbling up allies after the election results  which would clearly not have given the bjp the necessary numbers for modi and amit shah to flex their muscles.but there have been precedents to both situations. vishwanath pratap singh formed the government in       with outside support of the left front and the bjp. but the bjp withdrew support following the arrest of lal krishna advani over the ayodhya rath yatra that was passing through bihar when he was taken into custody by the police. shortly after  prime minister vp singh had to resign. with that confrontationist action  rashtriya janata dal s lalu prasad yadav  who was the chief minister of bihar at the time  changed the course of parliamentary politics.chandrashekhar replaced vp singh in the pm s post with outside support from the congress. the fate of that government was written on the wall. when the congress withdrew support  the government came apart. if the chandrashekhar government had been allowed to continue for at least a couple of years or even a year  history would have changed india s politics  and its history  would have taken a completely different path in more ways than one.also read  rss will decide if modi comes back to power or notit was during the peak of the election campaign that rajiv gandhi was assassinated and the electoral process was destabilised. had there been no election at that time  rajiv would have not been targeted and would have found time to reorganise the congress party for the next election.but rajiv gandhi s death paved the way for pv narasimha rao s leadership. indeed  even in that tragic situation  the congress could not win its own majority. narasimha rao led the government with just about     congress mps and supported mainly by jharkhand mukti morcha. so  even that was a coalition government.even the      election did not produce a majority for any party. the congress could win only     seats. the bjp had     seats. but because of a firm pre poll alliance  united progressive alliance chairperson sonia gandhi could claim the majority and form the government. manmohan singh would take oath as the prime minister  and return in       when the election would lead to the same parties forming a coalition  despite the congress having significantly improved its previous tally to     seats this time.the point to note is that even if the bjp manages to be the single largest party  it will be in the reckoning. modi can be stopped only if the opposition comes together solidly. if the opposition fails to work out proper and reliable understanding with other parties to form credible alliances  modi will sail through. the ball is neither in the bjp s court nor in the opposition s but is just hanging over the net. we cannot say which side it will fall to give that party an  advantage .the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




india hoped for an abe. it got a lost decade under modi
text size  a  a five years ago  i wrote that narendra modi could be india s shinzo abe. i couldn t have been more wrong.the chief minister of gujarat state had just been chosen by his party to become the next prime minister if it won the popular vote. writing for reuters then  i predicted he could lift the country s drooping economy  just as abe had been attempting to do in japan.to get an idea of how badly modi has undershot expectations  look at india s largest maker of consumer staples. hindustan unilever ltd. recently reported march quarter revenue growth of     the weakest in    months. but it was what ceo sanjiv mehta said that unnerved investors. consumer essentials are  recession resistant but not recession proof   mehta said.  at the end of the day  it depends on money in the hands of consumers. recession  in what team modi professes to be the world s fastest growing major economy from carmakers to toothpaste sellers  indian firms have had a lousy start to     . it s a performance that belies the economy s official gdp growth rate of     not to mention its advance to   th place in the world bank s ease of doing business ranking  from an abysmal    nd four years ago.in japan  abe has presided over what s possibly the longest economic expansion in its post world war ii history despite the burden of an aging population. the signature piece of his reforms has been unprecedented monetary stimulus to end the country s deflationary mindset.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfor a long time it looked like modi would catch up with his counterpart  who had a head start of about    months after taking office in december     . india s leader certainly had successes. they included a     billion reduction in the crippling debt of power distribution companies  so they could be healthy again and pay producers on time . in may       modi s government gave india its first modern bankruptcy law  and in august that year  parliament voted in favor of a national sales tax  promising freedom from a bewildering array of state levies.as late as october      there was nothing to distinguish between the     gains  in u.s. dollar terms  delivered by benchmark stock indexes in japan and india since abe took office.but the following month  modi did something bizarre. he made     of the country s cash illegal. abe never got around to dropping cash from helicopters to get citizens to spend. modi succeeded in doing the exact opposite  he froze the purchasing power of an unsuspecting population for several months.most people fail to realize that the loss of output india suffered in that two and a half year old episode wasn t temporary. the shadow is visible in hindustan unilever s latest results.demonetization forced indians to pull cash from informal business financing and real estate speculation and  along with what they had in hand  put it in bank accounts or mutual funds. property transactions  typically greased by cash that s not declared to tax authorities  stalled. even when the supply of new currency became normal  demand didn t revive. more people chose to spend on consumer goods  like a new motorcycle  instead  as kotak securities ltd. notes  encouraged by nonbank lenders that had no difficulty raising debt from cash stuffed mutual funds.this consumption edifice is now crumbling. for one thing  the financing that supported it has keeled over. for another  the spending was erected on incomes that weren t growing as fast as reflected in dubious gdp data. rural demand has been hurt by slumping prices of agricultural commodities.families cutting back on biscuits and toothpaste  this isn t how modi s five years were supposed to end. in terms of stock market returns  he s still leading abe. that may be because investors are underestimating the consumption slowdown and the dislocation in finance  which i termed india s mini lehman moment last september. hindustan unilever may not mean  recession  in the formal sense of two quarters of economic contraction  but its top executives are unlikely to be using the word carelessly.modi inherited an economy that had been mismanaged for five years and proceeded to repair it  only to throw it into chaos in the second half of his term. a poorly designed national sales tax has hurt government revenue  crony capitalists have made a mockery of the new bankruptcy law  and the debt overhang for power distribution companies has become just as grim as before.modi didn t become india s abe  but he did preside over half a japanese style lost decade.andy mukherjee is a bloomberg opinion columnist covering industrial companies and financial services. he previously was a columnist for reuters breakingviews. he has also worked for the straits times  et now and bloomberg news.also read  bleak record on economy   the reason modi s bjp has returned to communal politicssubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




as modi attacks rajiv gandhi  spotlight is on ins viraat s glorious history as naval warship
text size  a  a two years after it was decommissioned following a splendid    years in service  indian naval ship viraat  commonly known as the  grand old lady   has come back to life   thanks to the shrill political campaign this lok sabha election.prime minister narendra modi wednesday accused former prime minister rajiv gandhi of using aircraft carrier ins viraat as a  personal taxi  during a holiday when he was at the helm.as controversy broke out  then commanding officer of ins viraat vice admiral vinod pasricha  retd  and then flag officer commanding in chief of the southern naval command based in cochin  now kochi  admiral l. ramdas  retd  contradicted modi s claims.however  some other navy veterans  who were junior officers around that time  said the ship was indeed used for personal travel.also read  modi s claims on rajiv s ins viraat holiday completely wrong  says ex commanding officerthe prime minister  who also tweeted a link to a      india today report that went into great details about the    day holiday in lakshadweep  alleged that rajiv gandhi s italian in laws also accompanied him. according to the      report  even amitabh bachchan was on board ins viraat with the gandhi family. questionable actions were  however  in evidence. india s premier warship  ins viraat  was used to transport the gandhis and moved in the arabian sea for    days. its daily expenditure at sea is astronomical as the viraat travels with an entire retinue of escort ships   the      report by journalist anita pratap said.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now a submarine was also reported to be in attendance and some defence experts questioned the justification of depriving the navy of its most effective fighting component merely to suit rajiv s holiday plans. considerable expense was also incurred in setting up a special satellite link up at agatti for the duration of the holiday   the report further said.if this was indeed the case  then it will be the first time when a democratically elected leader commandeered prime military assets for personal holiday with family and friends.however  both vice admiral pasricha and former navy chief admiral ramdas denied that anyone was on board ins viraat except then pm and his immediate family  something that the rules allowed.also read  when rajiv gandhi had a whale of a time in lakshadweep  and performed a  heroic  actins viraat  commissioned into the indian navy just months before the infamous vacation  was the second centaur class aircraft carrier after ins vikrant  which was in service with the navy for    years.the ins viraat  in her earlier avatar  had won falklands war against argentina in      for the royal navy. she weighed about        tonnes and served in the british navy as hms hermes from november      to april     . after refurbishment  she was commissioned into the indian navy on    may     . the ship holds the guinness record for being the oldest serving warship.she operated sea harrier  white tigers   fighter aircraft   seaking   b  harpoons   anti submarine helicopters   seaking   c  commando carrier helicopters  and chetak  angles  sar helicopter .as per official records  various aircraft flying from the decks of ins viraat clocked over        hours  and the warship spent nearly       days at sea sailing nearly    lakh kms. she circumambulated the globe nearly    times.also read  from ins vikrant to ins imphal  how names of indian navy ships have evolved over the yearsthe warship participated in operation jupiter in       the indian peacekeeping operations in sri lanka  and operation vijay in       kargil war . she also took part in important international joint naval exercises   the malabar exercise with the us navy  varuna with the french navy  naseem al bahr with the oman navy.her last major appearance was at the international fleet review  ifr       at visakhapatnam. she was finally succeeded by ins vikramaditya  which was commissioned in     .the recent controversy has brought ins viraat back in news  but its glorious history as a naval warship can hardly be matched by any other ship.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




if modi fails to come back to power  it ll be because of himself  not the opposition
text size  a  a india s largest  most acrimonious elections are about to get into their final phase. most people might have expected that voters would be presented these past few weeks with a record of the narendra modi government s term in office  what it promises for the future  and the alternatives that the opposition offers. the campaign did indeed begin that way  with the bjp s slogan of  the impossible is now possible   namumkin ab mumkin hai   rahul gandhi s nyay hand out scheme  and arguments about the relative advantages and disadvantages of strong governments and coalition rule.it turns out though that few have heard of nyay  while opposition coalescence is very partial. in turn  the bjp discovered that its development record was not evocative enough and  using the pulwama balakot strike counterstrike  switched focus to national security. that s when reality and campaign rhetoric began their divergence.modi s uncanny ability to turn liability into asset was now in evidence. the chowkidar s failure to act on intelligence warnings about a terrorist strike against army convoys  the embarrassment of having a fighter plane shot down and  worse  a helicopter brought down by own side fire  the discovery that pakistan s air force  with a fraction of the indian air force s budget  can deploy better planes and better missiles and has more secure communications links   all this uncomfortable realisation was buried under a full throated campaign that focused on two high points  the balakot strike and getting masood azhar declared a terrorist. the congress  belated bleats that its own track record had surgical strikes and other successes to show were  as usual  pusillanimous.the national security debate took another curious turn  as though the country is in danger of being broken up by the  tukde tukde gang  of seditionists. nationalists should have greater confidence in their country s strengths. if indeed there is danger  what of government strategy  the escalating levels of violence in both naxal infested areas and jammu   kashmir point to policy failure. and china s security challenge gets no mention even as beijing s tentacles reach into india s neighbourhood.also read  digitisation is one of modi s successes  but rules for this new world need careful framingnow we have descended to the level of farce  with the campaign veering off into accusations against a prime minister dead for more than a quarter century  and before that  the actions of another prime minister dead for more than a half century. whatever the sins of commission and omission of nehru and rajiv gandhi  are they election issues in       or are these deliberately escapist diversions note that the economy has been given a convenient by pass by the bjp  except for the frequent assertion that no development took place for    years till modi came along. the congress  in its usual ineffective way  points to slowing growth  flat exports and declining investment  and new revelations about statistical fiction. more has been said on the stump about jobs and rural distress  but modi is yet to respond.how much of this matters to the voter  in partisan politics  people choose facts to suit bias or belief  more so when there is identification with a strong leader. for millions of voters  modi s record may not be the best  but he remains the best bet. or  they have bought into his hindutva nationalism. meanwhile  modi demonstrated yet again his ability to turn the tables on his critics by switching around the charge of tasteless criticism  and listing the multiple terms of abuse hurled at him over the years. rahul gandhi s  love dictionary   he called it with typical panache.if anything has become clear during this campaign  it is this  modi can bat on almost any wicket and hit the ball over the ropes. he will do it with a selective use of facts  play on emotion  and tropes about naamdars and kaamdars. should he lose his party s majority  as the pollsters say  or  more drastically  the chance to govern further  it will be less because of the opposition and more on his own account and because  despite an assiduous image build up over five years  aggressive social media trolling and impressive histrionics on the stump  voters in the heartland prove to be disappointed with what he has delivered.also read  modi govt sees rs  .  lakh cr tax shortfall  deficit  .   of gdp leaving fiscal holesubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




tamasha tv for a tamasha pm  how indian media covered modi this election
text size  a  a they have been in a boat following priyanka gandhi vadra on the ganga. they have discussed politics with a former miss india on board a flame coloured bus bearing the legend electionexpress  . they have ridden on motorcycles to cities and villages to listen to what women have to say. they are going on train yatras to understand the mood of the nation. and they have been on helicopters with the big boys   from bjp president amit shah to congress president rahul gandhi   to ask questions on strategy and sensibility.tamasha tv in the times of a tamasha prime minister battered by five years of an establishment whose senior ministers often call them  presstitutes  and a social media that has become adept at labelling critics of the government anti national  especially after the pulwama attacks  the tv news media has now gone into an overdrive to try and construct a narrative sourced from the public.is there a pro incumbency wave or an undercurrent of resentment  will there be an endorsement of prime minister narendra modi or a backlash against him  will the majoritarian government return with a majority or will regional leaders create an effective coalition  beat reporters have turned into boat reporters and a lot else to go beyond the lutyens  delhi narrative.as michiko kakutani says in her seminal book  death of truth   the post modernist argument that all truths are partial  and a function of one s perspective  led to the related argument that there are many legitimate ways to understand or represent an event.  this technique worked very well for supporters of donald trump in the      presidential elections and led to a major rethink in mainstream media in the us  where journalists and commentators were wrong footed by the assumption that hillary clinton would come to power.also read  how modi govt did the opposite of  vikas  vikas  vikas  by clamping down on dissentin india  an alternative discourse has emerged based on the growing use of social media  which  according to one estimate from statista  is used by     million people as of     . just as politicians have started cutting out the intermediary and are going directly to the voter  especially through whatsapp  in this election  the media is seeking to crowdsource its political analysis.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowrajdeep sardesai  consulting editor  india today tv  who anchors a popular programme called elections on my plate  says   in the studio  the attempt is to analyse. in the field  the aim is to report the sights and sounds of an indian election. on elections on my plate  i tell the story of people  their concerns and then try to use food as a backdrop to take the voter on a journey that makes elections more accessible beyond just the usual netaspeak.  the diversity of cuisine on offer matches the variety of opinions  unlike the same set of talking heads on tv every night.the generosity of ordinary people who were always ready with food  the high quality political analysis by the average voter  especially in bihar   the gaps that still remain between high flying rhetoric and the harsh reality of life  even in a place like gorai  so close to south mumbai  which is on the coast but hasn t had drinking water for the past    days   for rajdeep sardesai  these are the abiding memories from his coverage of the      lok sabha elections.away from the choreographed rallies  hired crowds and live streamed speeches  intrepid reporters from tv channels can defy the cynicism of social media posts and the clinical nature of party slogans. film director ramesh sharma  whose new delhi times        remains one of the finest political films made in the country  believes shows by tv news reporters take the viewers to the grassroots   capture the atmosphere  and give context . but sharma isn t sure they work.  it depends on the anchors  the questions and the follow ups. most of the time  it becomes only an embellishment because there is so little journalism  only fluff. also read  why media ground reports  opinion   exit polls don t agree with each other on electionsmuch as studio debates have become shouting matches  generating heat  not light  the elections have moved from issues to icons to the aam aadmi and aam aurat   or  just aam. add to that  says newsx s star anchor priya sahgal  the reporter who has become a key part of the story  and the medium becomes as important as the content itself. conventional interviews are no longer interesting  neither is the old fashioned campaign trail.  perhaps  the reporters are taking a cue from the prime minister himself since he is the biggest event manager  covering the election where he plays the lead role   sahgal adds.so  there are facebook surveys  whatsapp polls  selfies of the voting finger  prime ministerial interviews conducted in the lawns of his lok kalyan marg home  or on a boat on the ganga  and chats with rahul gandhi in between rallies and chopper rides. with a prime minister who has an eye for the dramatic while setting the agenda  television channels can only follow suit. planes  trains  automobiles   tv reporters are happy to catch anything to keep pace with him.the author is a senior journalist. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this is what has angered narendra modi this lok sabha election
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi ko itna gussa kyon aata hai  why is modi so often so angry this past saturday  modi described congress president rahul gandhi s father rajiv gandhi  a former prime minister  as  bhrashtachari number one   most corrupt . on monday  he followed up his remarks by challenging the congress to contest the remaining two phases of the lok sabha elections in the name of the former prime minister against whom serious allegations of corruption had been levelled.in an election marked by coarse language  the pm s unseemly comments about rajiv gandhi touched a new low. in  bhartiya sanskriti   you don t speak ill of the dead. his remarks invited a backlash not only from a variety of political leaders  from mamata banerjee to chandrababu naidu  it also put the bjp on defensive.also read  how rajiv gandhi   such a nice man   won and ruined india s biggest mandatethey also seemed to have rankled modi. at the rally in jharkhand monday  he explained why he had been so caustic about the former pm. yeh log picchle ek saal se desh ke pradhan mantri ko a maryad bhasha main  anaap shanaap bhasha main  jo chahe woh gaaliyan dete rahein   he said.for the past one year  the congress has been hurling abuses at the office of the prime minister  he said.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthen he added   maine toh ek shabd bola aur aapko bicchhu kaat gaya  i said one word about him  and you were stung by the scorpion    the pm asked.so  why is modi so angry and irritated all the time  here are three likely reasons first  he seems genuinely hurt that rahul gandhi has doubled down on  chowkidaar chor hai  and called into question his integrity. when the whole world is lauding him for being the key to india s extraordinary progress  modi believes  according to a political leader who knows him well and spoke on the condition of anonymity  how can someone question him on his moral compass.also read  rajiv gandhi to nuclear button  pm modi has made it amply clear he s panicking this electionmodi feels that the  naamdaar  gandhi family  along with the  lutyens media   wants to make fun of him in front of the world leaders he has taken such care to placate  and that certainly is a low thing to do. so  he has decided to hit back at the congress leadership s soft spot  sonia gandhi s husband and rahul priyanka gandhi s father  rajiv gandhi.note that modi hasn t targeted rahul s grandmother indira gandhi in the same way  perhaps because he wants to demonstrate that her strong armed tactics  especially the imposition of the emergency  were far ahead of her time.second  at the end of the fifth phase of the elections  with     seats having gone to the polls   and only two more phases to go   modi may be wondering if he is going to win india like he did in     .if the  mahagathbandhan  holds strong in uttar pradesh  if the trinamool congress  mamata banerjee holds west bengal in the face of a determined bjp onslaught and if the congress party wins between        seats  then it is clear that modi and the bjp are certainly encircled.that s many ifs and buts. but being the sharpest and shrewdest leader in india today  modi is certainly analysing the data from the       assembly constituencies  a number quoted by a political expert  that have already voted in this election.how did the caste constituencies vote  how did the muslims vote  did muslims vote in large numbers  knowing that they have been marginalised almost completely and third  modi s decision to turn the      election into one that has all the characteristics of hardline hindutva  according to one analyst  demonstrates his growing dependence on party president amit shah.in contrast  the      election was much more about issues like eradicating poverty. words like  hindu  and  hindutva  were deliberately pushed to the background in favour of  vikas  as well as the quotidian  chaiwallah .an india today study  which analysed modi s five election speeches in      as well as in       found that in       the dominant words in candidate modi s speeches were  poor      times    congress     times    bjp      times    gujarat      times    farmers      times  and  development      times .also read  i m a traditional bjp voting industrialist. narendra modi made me vote notain contrast  in        chowkidar  appeared     times  followed by  poor      times   the word  modi      times    congress      times    farmers      times  and  bjp      times .for modi  the      election has been more like the aftermath of the      riots  rather than the      campaign when the hopeful and aspirational prime ministerial candidate swept the nation.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




rajiv gandhi to nuclear button  pm modi has made it amply clear he s panicking this election
text size  a  a polling in two thirds of all parliamentary constituencies in the lok sabha      elections is over  and voting in the fifth phase has begun today. poll experts appear befuddled over which direction the election is trending. television anchors with cameras accost voters with questions on voting intent  analysts wrap their heads over inane voter turnout data in the hope of spotting a trend  foreign journalists and social media warriors spout opinions collected from anecdotes in their election tourism expeditions.yet  all this has only generated more noise rather than any real signals. the larger trend of the      elections is the phenomenon of the silent voter and the extreme localisation of national elections.also read  with   clean chits to modi  ec made it clear  bjp varanasi nominee is free to say anythingthere are some very clear takeaways thus far in the      elections. one  there is no  wave  for the ruling party  as in       as even the most ardent supporters of the bjp will admit. two  there is a silent clamour for change. three  for the first time in recent memory  a ruling party is seeking re election not on its performance in the last five years  but on some intangible idea of nationalism. four  this is not a national election  at best it is an election of    different states  but it is more like a      constituencies  election. five  traditional methods of election forecasting by using vote share from a survey of voters across the country to predict seats is defunct.there is no clearer evidence of a lack of a      type wave than the campaign rhetoric of prime minister narendra modi that plumbs to deeper lows with every phase of the election. from threatening to use the nuclear button to claiming that the opposition parties dream of his death to mocking the death of former prime minister rajiv gandhi who was assassinated brutally  modi has made it abundantly clear that he is in a state of absolute panic and despair over how the current election is trending for his party.the elevated hopes of hundreds of millions of voters in      and the subsequent dashing of them have led voters to become more sceptical and transactional about the      elections. voters are increasingly more concerned about the tangible impact on their daily lives such as jobs  incomes  prices etc.  rather than some vague national or ideological pursuits. such tangible needs also vary widely across constituencies and states.also read  here s how many seats congress can win in      lok sabha electionswe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfor eg.  the sterlite issue is the defining electoral issue in tuticorin  tamil nadu while stray cattle is the defining issue in maharajganj in uttar pradesh. thus  the      election has got very localised and feels like     different elections. this means that the voter s behaviour in this election is not being shaped by some national narrative  but by local factors such as the menu of choices on their ballot  substantial ideas that impact their livelihoods immediately and their trust in candidates.with elections becoming localised  there is an accompanying desire for change at the constituency level. but this desire is silent and cautiously expressed. we have run multiple experiments across various states to survey the same set of voters with the same set of questions on the same day but in different contexts  only to find that the responses vary dramatically depending on the interviewer and the circumstances. we find that a supporter of the ruling nda is much more vociferous and expressive than the one desirous of a change. in other words  a non bjp supporter seems far likelier to abstain from responding to questions or falsifying their preferences  if forced. this is referred to as the  silent voter  phenomenon in political science. the most famous observation of the  silent voter  phenomenon in the indian context was in the      lok sabha elections.this silent voter phenomenon could also explain why    per cent of exit polls since      across all state elections have been wrong. our analysis of     exit poll seat predictions of    state elections since      by the most frequent four polling agencies   cvoter  axis  csds and chanakya  show that they were wrong    per cent of the time.also read  why voters don t turn up in larger numbers in lok sabha elections   all politics is locallocalised elections combined with a severe  silent voter  problem have rendered most predictions by pollsters erroneous. in order to be able to accurately survey and predict  one must survey every constituency with a well stratified sample that does not induce a ruling party bias. this is an expensive proposition. most pollsters in the country lack the resources and the know how to do this.where does all this leave us with the current lok sabha election  in states such as tamil nadu  the desire for change is loud but in states like maharashtra  there is a strong but subdued vote for change. at this point  i can venture to say that it is sufficiently clear from our extensive surveys of every assembly constituency with a large sample size that at the end of the first four phases of polling  the congress party with its pre poll alliances is ahead of the bjp and its pre poll alliance parties.now  you are entitled to dismiss this as the opinion of a biased sample of one person  i can only submit that there is strong empirical evidence to back this claim.the author is the chairman of the data analytics department of the congress party. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




with   clean chits to modi  ec made it clear  bjp varanasi nominee is free to say anything
text size  a  a there s a reason  clean chits  are in the news this week. it rained clean chits. and they came from the election commission of india. in a bitterly polarised battle for the      lok sabha  citizens looked to the watchdog to make everybody fall in line. but this mother of all chowkidars   the election commission   doled out not one  not two  not three  but five clean chits to prime minister narendra modi  adding to the growing suspicion that this election lacks a level playing field.many were reminded of sunny deol s famous bollywood line  tareekh pe tareekh  when they repeated  clean chit pe clean chit .to be fair  nobody said this lok sabha election was going to be easy for the election commission  ec . tasked with the overwhelming challenge to inject decorum and decency into this battle through a legally unenforceable and non binding model code of conduct  mcc  is obviously not an easy job for the ec.also read  this is not an easy time to be the election commission of india. here s whyin the recent past  the eci has faced a barrage of criticism with opposition leaders often committing contempt against the constitutional body whose chief enjoys the status of a supreme court judge. even as political parties unthinkingly dragged the ec into their acrimonious political battles  some commentators continued to argue that the hallowed institution should be treated with the same respect as the judiciary. after all  the ec did stop yogi adityanath  pragya singh thakur  azam khan  maneka gandhi and mayawati from campaigning for a few hours.however  of late  it is becoming increasingly hard to defend  or even just fathom  some of the omissions and commissions of the ec   read the five consecutive clean chits to prime minister narendra modi and two others to bjp president amit shah.when the poll body came under severe criticism for not doing enough to rein in errant politicians at the beginning of elections  some had asked what the election commission can even do other than issuing notices to the politicians who seem determined to humiliate and discredit their opponents at all costs with scant regard for an ethical code of conduct. the matter even came under the supreme court s scanner  which pulled up the poll body for inaction.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  this      sc order is behind election commission decision to bar namo tvin no time  the ec responded with a slew of orders banning politicians defying the mcc from campaigning for a few days. but was it easier to censure yogi adityanath  maneka gandhi  mayawati and azam khan than the big shots of the bjp  modi and amit shah  if you are playing for legacy  then history will judge you by how you tamed the most powerful when they erred.as weeks passed  the ec maintained an inexplicable silence over complaints of alleged violation of the mcc by modi. no word of reprimand  not even a showcause notice was issued to the pm who allegedly violated the mcc and the ec s guidelines not once  twice or thrice  but six times   forcing the opposition parties to again knock at the door of the supreme court.the ec has now announced its decision in five of the six complaints  summarily absolving the pm of any violation of the mcc in each of them. according to the ec  the pm did not violate the mcc when he referred to congress president rahul gandhi s decision to contest from wayanad   an  area where the majority is in minority.  he did not violate the mcc even when he implored first time voters to dedicate their votes to the soldiers who carried out the air strikes in balakot  pakistan. the ec found no violation in the pm s casual invocation of the use of the country s nuclear arsenal against pakistan. it did not find anything technically amiss with the pm s statement that rahul gandhi  went out with a microscope to look for a safe seat to contest and selected a seat where the majority is in minority.  and it finally found nothing wrong with his statement that  new india gave a befitting reply to pakistan    again seen as an attempt by critics to politicise the balakot strikes.also read  election commission set to cancel lok sabha election in vellore after large cash seizureswhile the ec may have good reason to believe that none of the five statements made by the pm technically violate the mcc  modi was not even made to highlight those technicalities in his defense   lending credence to the impression that the he can continue to push the boundaries of propriety and decency in electoral discourse with impunity.a recent statement made by up chief minister adityanath  who has again been issued a showcause notice by the ec over his  babar ki aulad  remark made in a rally in sambhal last month  adequately captures the disregard and disdain most politicians have for the model code of conduct.  do we come to the dais to sing devotional songs   adityanath said  referring to the notice. perhaps  for adityanath and several other politicians  the mcc is little more than a temporary censorship on their speech   an impediment they can easily overcome by simply ignoring it.or  perhaps  in the eyes of those in power  the election commission ought to do no more than simply arrange the logistics for holding elections in the country. but of what good are institutions without their powers to tame the untamed fantasies of the powerful subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




how does rahul  of the tainted gandhi dynasty  expect to damage modi s image  arun jaitley
text size  a  a dynasts have self illusory opinion about themselves. they create a disproportionate image about their own abilities in their own mind and believe that the universe around them thinks alike. they tend to become megalomaniacs. rahul gandhi is no exception. he announced four months ago that prime minister  narendra modi  will lose in varanasi and that the bjp will be reduced only to a couple of seats. he has a disproportionate impression about his oratorical skills when he challenges one of the greatest communicators of his times  prime minister modi  for a public debate. he comes out with outrageous ideas about security  economy and social issues and believes that his views have found mass acceptability. with prime minister modi s personal acceptability ratings today being close to      rahul proclaims that he is dead sure that modi is very unpopular. the irony of every dynast is that he buys his own propaganda even if there are not too many others willing to accept it.dynasts have a sense of entitlement. they believe that they were born to rule. gandhis suffer from this sense of entitlement. the      election was an utter shock to them. losing to a person of modest origins and being reduced to the lowest ever strength in history  became unacceptable to the dynasty. it took them more than three years to get out of the shock of the      rout. the strategy devised was that modi had to be fought and removed. he was considered a strong and a popular leader. his delivery systems were extremely clear. he enforced honesty in public life. he was a strong performer on the security front. the  kaamdaar  was being admired for his work. unacceptability of a commoner challenging the dynast and defeating him led to both envy and revenge. rahul s statement quoted in a media organisation yesterday that  i have dismantled modi s image  was a give away. the only way a dynast with a little acceptability in the country can react to the commoner who defeated him is that  i will damage his image.  but how do you damage the image of a person who is riding perhaps at the peak of his popularity  how do you damage the reputation of a person who is known to be incredibly honest  can image be destroyed by a person who belongs to a family which has been tainted through generations with charges of corruption  how do you claim to have succeeded in damaging the image of a powerful personality where prime minister modi s acceptability ratings are close to     and rahul is finding it difficult to even breach the     mark its clear that rahul gandhi concocts falsehood  as in the rafale case  starts believing his falsehood to be true and eventually dreams that the falsehood has destroyed his opponent. he does not gauge public opinion. he only talks but does not listen. such people surround themselves with advisors who have also tactically learnt to only give good news to the dynast. rahul s attitude is at complete variation with the traditional congress way of doing things. his revenge against prime minister modi may not succeed. it may well turn out to be a revenge against the congress.this article was republished from arun jaitley s blog.also read  elections have become a convenient season to suddenly discover religion  arun jaitleysubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi s image as a doer has got a big boost with india s win on masood azhar at un
text size  a  a immediately after the un listed masood azhar as a global terrorist  prime minister narendra modi took a swipe at the previous congress led upa government for its prevarication and sloppy approach.pm modi wasted no time in claiming credit for the diplomatic win in his election speech in rajasthan. and by doing so  he gave the bjp s campaign on national security a big push in this high pitched lok sabha battle.only the politically na ve would expect an ace campaigner like modi to keep quiet on a win as big as this or wish that he starts thanking everyone  starting with the first prime minister of india  for what the united nations security council  unsc  has done in     .also read  can modi govt gloat over masood azhar when it has failed to tackle maoist terror in india barking up the wrong treesome leaders in the opposition  however  seem to be barking up the wrong tree by linking the timing of the un decision to the lok sabha elections.nothing could be further from the truth. before wednesday s big announcement on masood azhar  the unsc      sanctions committee had last met on    april when china wanted more time to decide on the designation.this holding off process reportedly brought beijing in direct confrontation with the us  which insisted on an immediate resolution of the declaration. the procedural  silence period   when member countries can raise objections  ended on   may. with no objections being raised during this period  the unsc sanctions committee listed masood azhar as a global terrorist.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowinstead of wholeheartedly backing the bjp government for successfully pushing through a long standing demand at the un  the opposition has been busy picking holes with the listing of masood azhar as a global terrorist.also read  masood azhar just a proxy  india should have gone after real perpetrator   pak militaryimpact on lok sabha electionsthe un listing of masood azhar as a terrorist will force pakistan to initiate a series of actions as part of compliance  from freezing his assets to putting a blanket ban on travelling abroad.the decision will  no doubt  have an impact on the lok sabha elections.soon after the elections dates were announced  the congress had embarked on an aggressive campaign to target the bjp over the rafale deal through the  chowkidar chor hai  slogan.by then  the balakot air strikes had started losing their immediate recall value. both the congress and the bjp were approaching the elections through a presidential style campaign.this is when the bjp launched a counter offensive with a campaign centred on nationalism and national security. the central message to the people was this  only under prime minister narendra modi s leadership  india could give a befitting response to pakistan in the wake of the pulwama terror attack.modi s strong statement of  dushman ke ghar me ghus ke marenge   will hit the enemy in their territory  reverberated with indians. in the absence of a strong and credible opposition  modi s message stuck. issues like unemployment and demonetisation paled into insignificance in the face of internal security and counter terrorism measures.even a bitter critic of modi  like the shiv sena in maharashtra  had to enter into an alliance with the bjp and fall in line with modi s hard line approach on security.now with china agreeing to the un designation of masood azhar  modi s muscular policy towards terrorism has got a stamp of approval.also read  pakistani media was quick to spin un action on masood azhar as diplomatic win for islamabadin the next three phases of lok sabha polling  several constituencies in the hindi heartland states will vote where national security is an emotive issue. border districts of rajasthan  like bikaner and ganganagar  will vote in the fifth phase and modi government s strong action against terrorists is bound to strike a chord with the electors there.the listing of masood azhar as a global terrorist seems to have further tilted the scales in favour of the bjp with modi s image as a doer getting a big boost. the voice on the ground is that no matter who the local candidate is  people will only vote for narendra modi.the author is the former editor of  organiser . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




shatrughan sinha questioned modi on his acche din promise   that s not opportunism
text size  a  a shatrughan sinha  who is popularly known as the  bihari babu   draws a crowd of thousands of supporters every time he steps out on the streets of patna. his nomination in patna sahib was a spectacle as the air reverberated with slogans of  bihari babu zindabad .yet  the theprint published an opinion piece tuesday written by an india foundation fellow and assistant professor at patna university titled    reasons why congress  shatrughan sinha is staring at defeat in patna sahib . the author did not delve deep into the reasons  instead the opinion reads like a promotional piece for the bjp s candidate from patna sahib  ravi shankar prasad.the first point the article makes is supposed to be on organisational background. it glosses over the bjp s organisational strength by stating the number of assembly seats the party has won in the parliamentary constituency. it then goes on to call ravi shankar prasad a tried and tested lawyer politician from the bjp  narrating his family background and stating how his father was a prominent jana sangh politician. it also talks about ravi shankar prasad s educational background and reminisces his abvp days.also read    reasons why congress  shatrughan sinha is staring at defeat in patna sahibthe author doesn t justify how a politician can be termed  tried and tested  if he hasn t contested a single lok sabha election and has always been given a rajya sabha seat instead  as is the case with ravi shankar prasad. worse yet  it presents nepotism as a virtue and associates the names of several big politicians with ravi shankar prasad in order to justify why he would win.it also makes no mention of shatrughan sinha s organisational background  a politician who won two lok sabha elections from patna sahib and has campaigned across the country for the bjp since      when the party had only two mps.the second point raised in the article is on the performance of the candidates. the author makes grand statements on how ravi shankar prasad is a hands on leader while shatrughan sinha hasn t achieved much as an mp. the article provides nothing factual or driven by data to support this statement.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowfacts  however  show that shatrughan sinha has been a much more proactive parliamentarian in ensuring development work in his constituency than ravi shankar prasad. data shows that sinha spent    .   per cent of the funds allocated to him under the members of parliament local area development scheme  mplads  in the current term. during his previous term              he utilised    .   per cent of the funds. this is the only metric of an mps performance that can t be gamed  unlike statistics for parliamentary questions and debates that depend on factors beyond an mp s control and have been of little purpose during this government s tenure.also read  shatrughan sinha has a problem   he still thinks he has to attack congressin contrast  the mplads website shows that ravi shankar prasad is still getting instalments released from         in february     .the author  in his attempt to discredit the work of shatrughan sinha  talks about bad urban planning and lack of infrastructure in patna  forgetting that the bjp and the jd u  have together been ruling the state for much of the last    years. this would make the incumbent chief minister and the bjp ministers a lot more responsible for the lack of development in the state s capital than the area s mp  as urban planning and infrastructure are essentially the responsibilities of the state and the municipal authorities.the condition of patna s urban infrastructure that the author describes would  in fact  support shatrughan sinha s views on how prime minister narendra modi has failed to deliver on his promise of  smart cities  as patna is also one of the cities selected under the scheme.the last point that the article makes is full of half truths and lies. the point with a provocative sub heading  opportunism at its worst  barely talks of opportunism  and instead focuses on the candidature of shatrughan sinha s wife from lucknow. it states that sinha has no designated campaign office in patna and spends more time in lucknow. both points are factually incorrect.sinha has a central campaign office operational in kankarbagh  the same area where his election office was located during the      elections. he travelled to lucknow only on the day his wife filed the nomination papers.also read   khamosh  will be battle code for shatrughan sinha  ravi shankar prasad in patna sahib clashquestioning the failure of prime minister narendra modi in delivering  achhe din  even at the height of his popularity would be the exact opposite of opportunism.who wins patna sahib is a matter that will only be resolved on    may. reading the article would reveal there is little to support the notion that shatrughan sinha is losing from patna sahib. the article is pure propaganda masquerading as an opinion.however  the issue is that in an election dominated by viral tweets and whatsapp forwards  several people will form their opinions based on the headline rather than analyse the contents of the article.voters must remember that their most important job isn t just to vote  it s also to be a well informed voter.the author is a data analyst and political consultant working with shatrughan sinha s campaign. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in his hyper nationalistic election speeches  narendra modi is writing india s security doctrine
text size  a  a as india does not have a formally declared national security strategy  the public pronouncements of prime minister narendra modi during the lok sabha election rallies have given us an  insight  into his  strategic thoughts .and if candidate modi rides to victory on    may  the bjp will be measured against all these grand pronouncements and promises.nuclear brinkmanshipaddressing an electoral rally at barmer in rajasthan on    april  modi said   india has stopped the policy of getting scared by pakistan s threats. every day  they  pakistan  would make claims about having nuclear weapons. even the media would bring out reports about pakistan having nuclear weapons. so  what do we have  are we saving them  nuclear weapons  for diwali  india s nuclear strategy  which evolved in       is based on  no first use  principle. against its quest for permanent membership  india was given a unique  waiver  by the nuclear suppliers group  nsg . based on its  responsible conduct  with respect to nuclear weapons and international non proliferation norms despite not having signed the prerequisite non proliferation treaty and comprehensive test ban treaty  india is a member of three multilateral export control regimes   the missile technology control regime  the wassenaar arrangement and the australia group.also read  bjp   congress manifestos offer a security policy high on emotions  low on substancemodi s barmer speech was the first time a prime minister of india spoke about the  usability  of nuclear weapons. one does not know if the pm signalled a change in india s nuclear strategy or merely sent a  signal  to pakistan  but the diwali statement virtually puts us in the same league as north korea and pakistan  and neutralises all our efforts to project ourselves as a responsible nuclear power. countries that oppose india s membership of the nsg would have surely taken note of this remark.it may be ironical but the most interesting fallout of this statement was pakistan s director general inter services public relations asif ghafoor s press conference on    april  where he almost spoke like an indian spokesperson on the issue of nuclear weapons. by design or default  the space for conflict below the nuclear threshold got expanded.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowladder of escalationthe modi government has been criticised for not going up the ladder of escalation after the      surgical strikes and the aerial encounter on    february to force compellence on pakistan. at a rally in patan  gujarat  on    april  modi responded to this   a top us official had said that modi had readied    missiles for the attack. fortunately  pakistan announced that the pilot  wing commander abhinandan varthaman  would be sent back to india. otherwise  it would have been  qatal ki raat   a night of bloodshed  . modi s remarks   the pm indirectly referred to his plans to use brahmos cruise missiles or prithvi series of missiles with conventional warheads   received thunderous applause.i am sure the pm must have taken pakistan s retaliatory capabilities into account. how the specific warning was conveyed is a matter of speculation  but the fact is that our pilot came back with or without international intervention.modi has left no doubt about his intent. the only issue now is the creation of an overwhelming qualitative and quantitative edge in ground  air and sea based precision guided missiles.space warfareat a rally in meerut on    march  the pm lauded india s successful launch of an anti satellite missile and linked it with his latest nom de guerre   chowkidar   when he said that india was now capable of doing  chowkidari in space .he was probably apprising the public of his plans to ensure that india is ready should there be space warfare. given a second chance  modi is most likely to create a space command.also read  if india continues to politicise military  we may not look very different from pakistana strong militaryat a number of rallies  the pm has spoken about the need for strong security forces to fight off internal and external threats. he also highlighted that india is facing terror threats and a lot of money is being spent on security  which otherwise would have been spent on welfare measures for the poor.but modi surely knows that the defence budget as a percentage of the gdp in the five years of his government has been the lowest since      except for     .vote for your militarymodi urged first time voters to vote for the soldiers who carried out the balakot airstrikes and those killed in action at pulwama.  this time  your vote should be cast for the country  for the country alone  for a strong government   he said.the way aheadno matter who comes to power for the next five years  there is going to be no escaping the national security reforms that have been languishing for the last two decades. the congress has made concrete proposals in its manifesto for reforming the national security council  bringing about tri service integration under the chief of defence staff and modernising the armed forces. national security is the core issue of the bjp s election campaign.also read  bjp   congress manifestos offer a security policy high on emotions  low on substancei have serious reservations about the exploitation of national security issues and the armed forces for electoral gains. the silver lining is that national security reforms have finally become a core issue among the indian public as well. in future  bluff and bluster will not do.lt gen h s panag pvsm  avsm  r  served in the indian army for    years. he was goc in c northern command and central command. post retirement  he was member of armed forces tribunal. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this election season  narendra modi is going beyond kautilya to make allies toe the line
text size  a  a along with kautilya s four methods of extracting both submission and allegiance   saam  daam  dand  bhed  or advice  bribery  punishment and exploitation   prime minister narendra modi has imposed a fifth on his allies. this is the asana of sitting in a meditative posture and stilling the mind  until the storm passes.here s an example. modi has cracked the whip and ensured that his somewhat troublesome ally in bihar  janata dal  united  s nitish kumar  has so completely stilled his mind that he has refused to release his own party s manifesto  for the first time since     .that s because nitish s party believes that article      which gives jammu   kashmir a special status in the indian union  the uniform civil code as well as the building of a ram mandir at the disputed site in ayodhya are  violative  of the secular tenets of indian democracy. but the  nischay patra   or manifesto  is still hanging in mid air   a bit like the mythological figure trishanku  in this age of mythological allusions   because pm modi and bjp don t like the fact that a key ally is articulating these things.so  the manifesto has remained unlaunched but is available for anyone who wants to read it.also read  george fernandes always said nitish kumar was one person whose mind he could never fathomthe janata dal  united  or jd u  has given in   gamely  some would say   because it sees advantage in the bjp vote being transferred on the ground in its favour. the jd u  feels it is abiding by its secular principles  which in this case amounts to sitting on the fence  but the fact is that modi has ensured that nitish s favourite yoga pose these days is the  shava asana . lying down  until the storm passes.all the other allies  whether the shiromani akali dal or the shiv sena  caved in a long time ago  which is why you saw them all sitting beside modi ji as he filed his nomination in varanasi last week. it s another matter that nobody was smiling.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowinterestingly  modi has ensured the autonomous election commission behaves the same way. the credibility of the institution is at stake  with its refusal to take stock of complaints as old as one month. these include the pm asking for votes in the name of the soldiers killed in pulwama  latur    april  and criticising the opposition for its position on sabarimala  tamil nadu     april .also read  na ve to assume narendra modi s varanasi roadshow is meant to win a single seatwith     constituencies out of     having voted already  but three crucial phases still left with     seats  former cec t.n. seshan s cracking the whip comes to mind   do you think i should allow politicians to commit dacoity on democracy   was one well known comment . if seshan was around at nirvachan sadan today  at least the expenditure of the pm s roadshow in varanasi last week would have certainly earned his ire.remember that there is no limit to what political parties can spend  but there is a rs    lakh limit on the expenditure by a candidate. the saffron razzmatazz in varanasi would have far exceeded that  by any estimate. but the ec has kept very quiet.certainly  modi doesn t seem to care. his comments monday in sreerampur in bengal that    trinamool congress mps are  in touch  with him has provoked the tmc into readying a complaint against him in the ec. the congress is also moving the supreme court to request the ec to take cognizance of its complaints against modi before the election ends.modi is banking on the fact that it s all too little  too late. he has said what he has to say and anyway only     seats are left. even if the ec takes cognizance  it will first issue him a show cause notice  wait at least    hours for him to respond and then take action. too many ifs and buts.also read  varanasi        why i d said  before the secular dip  hold your nosemeanwhile  the modi juggernaut rolls on. the country has seen this movie before  when india was indira and indira was india and it didn t end too well.but modi certainly isn t making the same mistakes again. chanakya already said that  saam  daam  dand  bhed  are the four attributes to make a nation fall in line. adding the  shava asana  to kautilya s lexicon is a wily addition on the part of india s most ambitious leader today.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi is contesting      elections not as india s pm but as gujarat s cm of     
text size  a  a mid way through the lok sabha elections  voters are keeping everyone s hopes alive. the nda camp is reading a repeat of      in the vocal support on the ground for narendra modi and the balakot air strikes  the left libs and the so called secular camp are looking for a       like  prevalence of  silent votes  and a determining role of caste  and the psephologists   or most of them  to be fair to a professional few   are making hay with caveat laden predictions that would hold true regardless of the results on    may.they are all watching every word  every action of top leaders to see signs of support for their own political preferences. for those who want a change of guard at the centre  the gathering of nda partners in varanasi to witness the filing of nomination papers by modi was a sign that the bjp is  jittery  about not getting a majority on its own. for those who want another term for modi  the same gathering was  a show of strength .the many interpretations for modi s act of touching the feet of shiromani akali dal leader parkash singh badal  a nonagenarian  were on similar lines. and so were the perceptions regarding andhra pradesh chief minister n. chandrababu naidu s demand from the election commission to stop the use of evms and revert to ballot system  two days after the lok sabha and assembly elections in the state.also read  na ve to assume narendra modi s varanasi roadshow is meant to win a single seaton    may  it will be clear which camp got it right and which didn t. but  after three of the seven phases of polling   the fourth is underway monday   there are two takeaways from modi s politics this election season.first  modi is contesting like the gujarat chief minister of       determined to regain power whatever be the cost   and not like a statesman prime minister a la atal bihari vajpayee  looking to leave a legacy.on friday  modi and malegaon bomb blast accused and bjp candidate from bhopal sadhvi pragya singh thakur were on the same page as they projected themselves as victims of the congress   injustice and atrocities   with thakur citing it to equate herself with the prime minister. in a tv interview on the banks of the ganges friday  he declared her innocent and pointed out how the congress had also targeted him in a similar fashion. pragya thakur may or may not be a victim of a political conspiracy  but can you think of the prime minister of india declaring the innocence of a terror blast accused who is out on bail we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe now miya musharraf  and pakistan used to be his keywords in      speeches     years later  his speeches are still not complete without references to pakistan.after      lok sabha elections  a sizeable section of the country s intelligentsia  including many modi baiters  were inclined to believe that as a prime minister he was looking to leave his legacy as a  vikas purush  and a statesman politician. as he travelled around the globe  many in the bjp would talk about how he awed world leaders  often adding that his friend and then us president barack obama was awarded the nobel peace prize in      for strengthening international diplomacy.modi has his priority right in     . he is no longer talking about bullet trains or smart cities. people should vote for him because only he can provide them the security without which their material possessions  or aspirations for them  are meaningless.also read  why      is such a dull  boring electionthe second takeaway is modi s   and his confidant amit shah s   assessment about the sheer irrelevance of the bjp candidates and aspiring members of parliament  no matter what the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss  says against individualism and personality cult.lok sabha election in      is all about modi as it was in     .  in all corners of the country  they believed modi was the only hope and wanted to see him win   modi had told british author lance price after the      election.exasperated with the delay in the announcement of party candidates  a ticket seeker from punjab came to see bjp national general secretary  organisation  ram lal  who then called up party president amit shah to convey the state leader s feelings.  what s the hurry  people will vote for modi  not for him  was the message from shah as conveyed to the punjab leader who eventually didn t get the party ticket.the bjp leadership isn t wrong in its assessment. seldom does one hear potential bjp voters on the ground talking about the merits or demerits of party candidates  it s all about modi.but in sustaining and promoting brand modi   the prime minister says he is not a brand  instead his is a  zindagi  or a life that is lived in the service of others   the bjp is becoming much like the congress where popular regional leaders have to be sidestepped and finished politically for the nehru gandhi family to survive and thrive.look at how former chief ministers of rajasthan  madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh   vasundhara raje  shivraj singh chouhan and raman singh   who are all mass leaders in their own right  have been sidelined and pushed to the margins in the bjp today. each of them  as many others  had the potential to grow into a national leader  but the bjp would rather make do with only one mass leader  modi  for as long as it lasts.also read  there is a new congress in town and it s the bharatiya janata partythe congress looks doomed today as the nehru gandhi family no longer has the appeal to ensure a candidate s victory and there is no second rung leadership to take charge.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




from padman to pm modi interview  akshay kumar is on a nation building project
text size  a  a what does prime minister narendra modi do when he has a cold  did you spend a lifetime wondering this  no  it doesn t matter. because bollywood star akshay kumar made sure that you know the answer to this  and to many more such inane questions about the prime minister.and that is why akshay kumar is the newsmaker of the week   adding a faux journalist s role into his acting skills.in what was a spectacle of everything corny  akshay kumar interviewed pm narendra modi this week at    lok kalyan marg. despite evident efforts  the interview failed to do the one thing it set out to   be apolitical.a starry eyed akshay kumar was visibly giddy after every answer that came his way   not exactly the actor s most easy and effortless performance.but his gushing  unabashed love for the prime minister notwithstanding  this was hardly the start of akshay kumar s nation building project.also read  the  apolitical  interview between pm modi   akshay kumar was more than just about mangoesfrom a rousing speech in the film namastey london over a decade ago reminding a snobbish white man of everything glorious about india  to his unbreakable resolve to  fix society  in movies like padman and toilet  ek prem katha   akshay kumar is a man on a mission  and he won t stop at anything to achieve it. there is one problem though   the mission is hazy as  sabka saath  sabka vikas .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhy is using your craft and your profession to help transform society a problem  it isn t. after all  aamir khan too has often been credited for being the sole voice of reason in hindi cinema  and through his tv series satyamev jayate.so  in ways more than one  akshay kumar s choice to portray a man who wants to democratise sanitary pads and build hygienic toilets is commendable. what is also commendable is his naivete  which can bring him to   if he does   genuinely believe that he can conduct an interview with the prime minister of the country in the middle of the lok sabha elections  and call it  apolitical . perhaps that also perfectly defines his depiction of nationalism sanitised and simplistic.also read  twinkle khanna and akshay kumar have cracked the marriage code marne ke liye tere paas paise hain  lekin biwi ko maut se bachane ke liye nahi   you have enough money to kill yourself  but not enough to save your dying wife    asks a moralistic  virtue signalling akshay kumar to a troubled man smoking a cigarette outside a clinic  in an advertisement presumably about sanitary pads  or prevention of smoking  or both. and it is in that moment that you realise only an akshay kumar can pull off a bunch of what might seem like contrived connections   between a woman s health  a man s smoking habits and a family s monthly budget. it is a way of not only reaching out to the masses but also at times educating them   kumar said in reference to his movies with a message.even someone as unapologetically hyper nationalistic as modi  who has been boasting about the balakot airstrikes in his campaign speeches  needs someone like akshay kumar. because as track record would prove  kumar can successfully sell a neatly packaged script of a superficial but palatable  and at times even convincing  idea of patriotism.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




in the bhojpuri music world  modi has become  balma chowkidar  this election season
text size  a  a most indians have at some point or the other heard the hit bhojpuri song  lollypop lagelu    it became quite the youtube phenomenon when it was released in      and now has over    million likes. it made its singer pawan singh a star.the popular perception about bhojpuri music is that they either have raunchy lyrics or that they are about feelings of longing for home. the profanity still continues  but the cut throat competition on youtube for likes and views and the pressure to stand out have pushed the bhojpuri music industry to newer territories. and with prime minister narendra modi fighting to return to power in the mammoth      lok sabha elections  politics cannot be far.also read  the rise of the communal hate soundtrack in indialalu and nitish reunite in songsthe current political climate of the country has acted as a catalyst for new and emerging bhojpuri musicians. a simple youtube search with words like  bhojpuri    politics  and  songs  brings up many music videos based on lalu prasad yadav  nitish kumar and narendra modi.most of these songs use techno music and the voices of the singers are auto tuned. the music is catchy and the lyrics simple   which is perhaps why they attain popularity so quickly.the rift between rashtriya janata dal and janata dal  united    a watershed moment in bihar politics   has especially permeated the bhojpuri song universe.for instance  the song  nitish chhodale sath  nitish broke ties   sung by rahul ranjan and produced by max studio talks about how nitish kumar did not take the right step by parting ways with lalu.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowanother song   achara pasari rabri maiya  sung by chhotu chhaliya celebrates lalu prasad yadav and mourns his arrest. the song calls lalu s wife rabri devi as  rabri maiya  mother   and has garnered almost four lakh views in a short span of    days.ode to modi and bjpthe bhojpuri songs are not confined to regional politics only. they revolve around anything that is topical and can fetch views on youtube.the song  abaki baar no chaukidar  no chowkidar this time   sung by shreya yadav and produced by bsd bhojpuri says   cycliya ke button dabawe da  phir se akhilesh ke aabe da  press the cycle button and make akhilesh victorious  .another song is a reaction to singer actor  nirahua   dinesh lal yadav  joining the bjp recently in uttar pradesh. the song  nirahua bhail gaddar  sung by dinu lal yadav  calls nirahua a traitor and criticises him for joining the bjp. it has over two lakh views already.after the pulwama balakot episode  many songs have been based on the relationship between india and pakistan. most of these songs glorify the bjp and pm narendra modi s policies. they are nationalistic and often islamophobic.the song  surgical strike    sung by dhananjay sharma says   jaish ke thikana par vaar modi ji kaile bade  pakistan main bharat ke aukaat phir dikhaule bade  modi targeted jaish camps and showed pakistan india s might again .  the comments on the song on youtube unanimously say  jai hind . pura pakistan jala denge  sung and released by jallu raja only a few days after the pulwama attack in february patches together visuals of war  blood thirsty indians and despairing former pakistani presidents.  mangabe je kashmir ta dhar ke sina faad deb  if you demand kashmir  we will tear you    the song proudly announces.you can also find songs on gst  triple talaq and demonetisation.but all the songs don t profess love for the bjp or modi. there are songs that mock the bjp for losing the three crucial assembly elections in december last year. some also poke fun at  chaiwala  and  chowkidar  narendra modi.also read  this kashmiri sikh is using music to cross national and religious dividesmodi  the redeemerthese political songs are sung not just by newcomers seeking to make their mark in the bhojpuri industry  but by the big stars too.pawan singh  who sang  lollypop lagelu  also lent his voice to  abhinandan ka abhinandan hai  after pakistan returned the iaf pilot to india. the song has more than    lakh views on youtube.pawan paswan  a young bhojpuri singer  says   we don t know what are modi ji s policies  but we know only he can redeem this country. sandeep chaturvedi  who sang  yeh hai mere ram ki dharti   comes from ayodhya and identifies himself as a  nationalist . the    year old tells us that his songs aim to create awareness about his dharm and nation. his videos are flooded with comments like  jai shri ram  and fans supporting the idea of a hindu rashtra. chaturvedi boasts that his stage shows in bihar easily attract around        fans  despite negligible publicity.pushpak raja  a young singer who sang  pakistani sala  and  sun gujarati sala   is extremely proud of the response his songs have garnered on his youtube channel. to date  no politician has been able to avenge an enemy the way modi did   raja says.a viral bhojpuri video can easily get a million views  but for a newbie like raja  even a thousand views is a big deal and help him gain recognition in small circles.also read  the hindu   muslim djs behind india s hate soundtrackcontroversy free but politicalin a narrow lane in ganesh nagar  east delhi  an inconspicuous music studio offers a platform to many emerging bhojpuri musicians.a group of five people sit in ambey studio discussing their forthcoming releases. during this brainstorming session  one of the concerns raised is about singing political songs but also avoiding controversy.pravin samrat  a    year old singer from motihari district of bihar  has gained significant recognition in the industry. when he sang  atal sang sonia faraar   he got into quite the controversy and was compelled to pull the song down from youtube.the singers in the studio zero in on the  main bhi chowkidar  campaign launched by the bjp and pm modi. after discussing various options like  yaar chowkidar    pyaar chowkidar  and  chowkidar dildaar   samrat decides to sing  mera balma chowkidar hai  my lover is a chowkidar  . others grin.vikas  the owner of ambey studio is aware of this rising political trend in the bhojpuri music industry.  these days the political scene is rife  therefore  songs with political themes are crowding the industry   he says.and the audience isn t complaining.rajat mishra and midhat fatimah are freelance journalists. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




digitisation is one of modi s successes  but rules for this new world need careful framing
text size  a  a in an election season that has plumbed the depths in many ways  and is notable also for the pushing of sundry false narratives that are demonstrably divorced from the reality  an unqualified success that the modi government can lay claim to is the significant advances made towards what in short can be termed a digitally connected country. this is captured neatly and imaginatively by a report put out by the mckinsey global institute  digital india  technology to transform a connected nation.india is now next only to china in the number of its internet subscribers     crore   and in the number of apps downloaded  over       crore in      . indians also spend more time on social media than the people of any other country. india happens to be digitising faster than any country other than indonesia     per cent growth since        with plenty of headroom for more growth. no country at a comparable level of per capita income would seem to be in the same ballpark on these metrics.also read  everyone is growing but no one is making money in india s champion sectorswhat has brought this about  the short answer is aadhaar  jio  jan dhan  and the goods and services tax. the last of these has led to  .   crore businesses getting on to a tax paying digital platform. mckinsey outlines some developments that are well known  data costs have plummeted    per cent since       while fixed line download speeds have quadrupled. the result  it seems  is that mobile data consumption per user has increased     per cent annually  there is more  the poorer states are closing the digital gap with the wealthier states. up alone has added some  .  crore to its online population. crores of ordinary people in towns and even villages can now go online and read the news  chat with friends  send money  watch movies  order food  and shop. all of it put together is nothing short of transformative a word that the modi government likes to use in many other  less convincing contexts.the macroeconomic consequences are said to be substantial including on jobs. but it s a good news story  for the report says the digital economy will generate    .  crore jobs by         crore more than the    .  crore existing jobs that are in danger of disappearing or getting automated. farming costs could go down by    per cent through more efficient use of inputs  and income could go up by    per cent through better product prices attained on online networks  while post harvest waste could be cut significantly. logistics costs    per cent of gdp in india  nearly twice what it is in some other economies could be pared through more efficient tracking and use of truck movement  fleet turnaround times could reduce by    per cent or more .the health industry could benefit enormously from digital technologies  so perhaps could education. indeed  some of the disadvantages that small businesses face vis   vis large businesses in terms of the relative speeds with which they move to digital functioning may get reduced over time. while large companies will be able to take greater advantage of artificial intelligence and the internet of things  better connectivity and falling data costs could reduce that advantage.also read  on gdp  it s time to construct an indian version of the li keqiang indexnone of this will happen automatically. as mckinsey points out  governments  businesses and individuals will all have to embrace change and figure out the best ways to move towards digitisation including on such basics as land records and business transparency  which could improve access to bank credit . there are also many aspects of this wave of digitisation that are not to the good including the impact of toxic social media  the loss of privacy  and so on.the rules for this new world will have to be framed carefully to prevent business capture as well as political misuse  and to protect citizens from predatory action. what is required is to minimise the costs as much as to maximise the benefits. still  the over riding message is clear  the prospects of digitisation are so overwhelmingly advantageous  if not also inevitable  that those who become laggards in adapting to the new reality are the ones that will be left behind.by special arrangement with business standard.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




na ve to assume narendra modi s varanasi roadshow is meant to win a single seat
text size  a  a narendra modi s six km long roadshow in varanasi thursday already looked like a victory rally with people coming out in large numbers to welcome the pm in his constituency.the roadshow  coming hours after the much publicised interview with akshay kumar  ensured that narendra modi ruled the airwaves for consecutive days.the filing of nomination papers by modi was an equally grand affair  with nda allies like nitish kumar of janata dal  united   shiv sena s uddhav thackeray and shiromani akali dal s parkash singh badal accompanying him friday in a major show of strength.the two day varanasi blitzkrieg has clearly served the bjp s purpose in this lok sabha election.also read  the  apolitical  interview between pm modi   akshay kumar was more than just about mangoesit has made sure that modi s invincibility once again becomes the talk of the town. the roadshow has established that there is hardly any doubt about the return of the modi led nda government after    may. he has already declared that he has won varanasi.just a few weeks ago  several analysts and opinion polls were busy forecasting back of the envelope numbers for the bjp this election. some even asked what would be the bjp s  plan b  if the party failed to cross the     mark. there were even talks about the nda partners preparing alternate plans in the  most likely  scenario of the bjp struggling to get enough numbers in the lok sabha.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowsuddenly  all that is past now.one massive roadshow  and all the ink on these envelopes has evaporated. the  benaras bash   the  saffron tsunami  are just some of the expressions used by the media to describe the event  which has been choreographed by the bjp s campaign managers with military precision.the mega show has successfully driven home the message that not only will the bjp repeat its      performance  but it will possibly come back with more seats across india and a bigger victory margin for narendra modi in varanasi.the national telecast of the varanasi roadshow and its reach on social media will also add heft to every bjp candidate s campaign in his her constituency.like       narendra modi s campaign managers have ensured again that the overwhelming sentiment among the voters should be    there s no alternative to modi .also read  this election  modi has pitched himself as india s real life  terror fighting sunny deolthe      lok sabha election was fought on the lines of the us presidential election  with personalities dominating the campaign more than issues or ideology. the      election too is now gradually turning out to be personality oriented.many political observers would agree that personality oriented campaigns are advantageous to the party that has a more towering leader as against those who struggle with image management of their leaders. not just smaller parties  even a century old congress party pales into insignificance when its leader is compared with modi.it is no coincidence that the congress thursday announced ajay rai s name for varanasi  hours before modi s roadshow began. speculations were rife that priyanka gandhi vadra  who is also the congress in charge for eastern up  would contest from varanasi. such a contest would have no doubt drawn maximum attention and publicity. but the grand preparations for the roadshow and the enthusiasm among people in varanasi to greet modi surely had an impact on the congress  final decision.it would be na ve to believe that this spectacular roadshow was designed to win just one seat. varanasi roadshow has pumped up the bjp s all india campaign.as far as modi s campaign is concerned  it is never about limited optics. the show of strength is a signal to the bjp s partners that narendra modi is a pan india leader under whose leadership even allies can hope to improve their seat tally.while some of the nda s allies tried to drive a hard bargain on the basis of their support base in the states  the roadshow has shown them the mirror. it is doubtful if any leader of any other political party can boast of such massive show of support and strength as demonstrated by modi.also read  modi   shah have turned india into  jingostan    are out to conquer the paranoid countryneedless to say  the bjp has to work hard to convert this show of strength on the streets of varanasi into votes in the polling booths. modi urged the bjp workers in varanasi friday to ensure the temple city turns out in record numbers to vote.the congress  on the other hand  will have enough time after    may to dwell on the reasons for its miserable defeat in the wake of modi s campaign blitzkrieg.the author is former editor of  organiser . views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




sri lanka attacks give modi campaign opportunity to exploit high octane nationalism
text size  a  a it is increasingly clear that the easter sunday blasts in sri lanka could and should have been prevented. warnings about the group responsible  their intentions and even specific attackers were delivered in well in advance. both president maithripala sirisena and prime minister ranil wickremasinghe have acknowledged that the information did not reach them and wasn t acted upon.the two men   and their respective parties   are still at loggerheads after a months long constitutional crisis last year in which the former tried and failed to fire the latter. the president has attempted to exclude the prime minister from decisions over most national security issues  a divided and confused colombo establishment clearly contributed to the security breakdown.no doubt this will become a factor in elections later this year  former defense minister gotabhaya rajapaksa   whose family  led by former president mahinda rajapaksa  dominated sri lankan politics till a few years ago   recently insisted in an interview with bloomberg that the government was  never serious  about security and was  more concerned  about reconciliation after sri lanka s decades long civil war.also read  india sent   alerts to warn sri lanka ahead easter sunday attackfair enough. in the elections already underway in next door india  though  the attacks are adding more fuel to an already ugly politics of patriotism and national security. and accountability is the last thing being discussed.indian prime minister narendra modi was swift to bring up the sri lanka attacks as a reason to vote for his bharatiya janata party  a vote for the bjp  he said  was a vote to destroy terrorism of the sort sri lanka had suffered.this feeds into the modi campaign s ongoing efforts to exploit high octane nationalism. the bjp seized upon a confrontation with pakistan in february to turn the national conversation away from its spotty economic record.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowsince the bjp is actually in power  though  it can t snipe from the outside as the rajapaksas are doing. so bjp figures have essentially resorted to calling the opposition terrorist sympathizers.also read  blasts in sri lanka indicate volatile south asia could be the next middle eastthe congress party s fairly detailed election manifesto could have served to open an argument on the most effective way to balance welfare and economic growth. instead  the bjp has zeroed in on the congress  proposal that some particularly draconian and illiberal laws be diluted. modi s finance minister  who you d think would have had plenty to say regarding the opposition s lack of fiscal mathematics  instead focused on calling their manifesto a  charter to weaken india  and an  agenda for balkanizing india. other rhetoric has been much harsher than that to which indians are accustomed. modi s right hand man  bjp president amit shah  said this week that after an indian air strike on pakistan there was  mourning  in just two places  pakistan and the congress . this is a familiar charge  before elections in modi s home state of gujarat a couple years ago  modi accused his predecessor as prime minister manmohan singh of a  secret meeting  with pakistani diplomats  implying that the latter were seeking to influence the election results.it has been absurdly easy for modi and the bjp to make security into a major  if not the primary issue in the election. unfortunately  this heated rhetoric seems to be considered an adequate replacement for any more rational response.india s february air strikes into pakistan   in retaliation for an attack on an indian paramilitary convoy in troubled kashmir   were seen in many quarters as influenced by electoral considerations. crucially  there has been no accountability for the security failures that led to the convoy bombing. kashmir is so heavily militarized that a sophisticated attack of that sort should have been prevented.unlike in sri lanka  nobody in new delhi has taken responsibility for the original failure. it s fine to talk about national security during a campaign. but the most important questions aren t being asked  why did the attack happen  which group organized it and how did they build up their strength  how can other such attacks be prevented the coarseness of the current debate in india is not just a betrayal of the large part of the electorate that wants a clear discussion of bread and butter issues. it is frankly dangerous for national security itself. one hopes sri lanka will  over the next few months  have a more productive political dialogue than india has had.mihir sharma is a bloomberg opinion columnist. he was a columnist for the indian express and the business standard  and he is the author of  restart  the last chance for the indian economy. also read  easter massacre opens door for strongman rajapaksa to return in sri lankasubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why it s okay for liberals to retweet raj thackeray s anti modi tirades
text size  a  a see the liberal hypocrisy  the familiar complaint is heard again as liberals go gaga over raj thackeray s anti modi tirades. how easy it is for liberals to forget what a regionalist and chauvinist raj thackeray has been in his attacks against immigrants and muslims alike.liberals tweeting retweeting raj thackeray are not endorsing his views and actions against muslims and non marathis. it s important in times like ours to separate issues from people. hate the sin  not the sinner.ideological purity is only for the radical left that gets its dopamine rush by constantly marginalising itself. realpolitik comes in shades of grey.it is okay to make issue based alliances without endorsing everything about your ally. one may  for instance  not agree with the gender politics of a muslim politician but may join hands with him  or rarely  her  on the issue of religious discrimination and hate crimes against muslims. muslims often express solidarity with sikh riot victims of       which does not mean they are also supporting  say  caste discrimination in gurdwaras.also read  how raj thackeray went from being freedom s foe to liberal poster boymany liberals root for the congress despite its abominable history of the emergency of      or the sikh pogrom of       but they overlook it because they see hindutva as a bigger danger to democracy and civil rights. similarly  liberals these days are having to overlook a lot of the trinamool congress  hooliganism in bengal s villages because the alternative is no longer the cpm but the bjp  which wants to question the very citizenship of    per cent of west bengal s population.one can admire  learn from and even support mahatma gandhi   even call him a mahatma   despite not agreeing with his answers to the dalit question. one could be with ambedkar on that  and yet be with gandhi on the issues of religious pluralism and non violence.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowif we were to start practicing ideological purity with respect to each person and every organisation  we would be reduced to the republic of one. which is fine too  except if one is looking for mass politics  mass action and mass movement  ideological purity is a non starter.liberals must speak loudly against raj thackeray if he s their greatest problem right now. but he s not even contesting this election. if the idea is to challenge modi  watching and sharing an anti modi speech by raj thackeray is going to help. and no  it s not going to give raj thackeray s bigotry  legitimacy  because one is not endorsing the bigotry also read  bjp  shiv sena are losing sleep over raj thackeray though he s not contesting this electionthe bjp and the rss understand this well. they understand that in order to pursue long term ideological goals  they need power  and power demands tactical short term compromises. so  team hindutva is okay with beef in the northeast and kerala  even in goa. the bjp s pursuit of hindutva can change from time to time. they don t want to cede space to the congress or anyone else until such time when they can instantly build the perfect hindutva nation state. they know that politics is not a pure veg restaurant  no onions  no garlic.similar objections  driven by ideological purity  have been made in the past about the liberal s rediscovery of arun shourie and their support to the lokpal movement. just what was lost in either case arun shourie gave us the most memorable description for the achhe din years   congress plus cow . in three words he demolished modi s larger than life image early into his prime ministership.the lokpal movement sought the support of the left  the right and the centre on a single issue. there were left liberals who would call it proto fascist and neo fascist and what not because they believed the sangh was supporting it. so did some lal salam apparatchiks but that didn t bother the sangh parivar  which seeks to mingle and evangelise  not measure ideological purity and marginalise itself.the same leftists who were critical of the lokpal movement became the biggest supporters of the aam aadmi party when it defeated the bjp in delhi     . had their censorship of the lokpal movement in the name of ideological purity succeeded  we would have had a bjp government in delhi.also read  is rss wary of modi shah  a quiet  support  to raj thackeray in maharashtra signals sothere s something else that raj thackeray s successful anti modi speeches tell you. they re in marathi but such is their popularity that excerpts are now being circulated with english and hindi subtitles across the country. this tells you about the vacuum in anti modi campaigning. raj thackeray would have seemed like a wannabe if the congress had one single leader with the ability to do what raj thackeray is doing. if only the liberals had an orator like raj thackeray.surprising how the enforcement directorate hasn t raided him yet.views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




the  apolitical  interview between pm modi   akshay kumar was more than just about mangoes
text size  a  a here s a question you have always longed to but been too scared to ask prime minister narendra modi  do you eat mangoes actor akshay kumar has now asked it for you   and for his driver s daughter who  he said  actually wanted an answer to that question. for her and those of you who missed   modiwithakshay  or  pm modi unplugged  wednesday  here s his reply  yes.the leader of the world s largest democracy met india s highest and the world s seventh highest paid actor        forbes  for a  mann ki baat   abp  in what times now called  an  apolitical interview  with the  human being  narendra modi  and not the prime minister narendra modi.anyone who believes there can be an  apolitical  interview with the prime minister right in the middle of the lok sabha elections   or at any other time for that matter   knows nothing about modi and should watch this interview to understand that for him  everything is political.also read  modi says mamata sends him kurta   he has friends in opposition in interview to akshay kumar desh ko parivar bana diya  is not a personal testament  it s a political statement  just as this personalised interview was an attempt to humanise the image of a stern  strict  administrator as the reel life padman called modi.back to the interview  kumar s questions and reactions were suffused with child like wonder   indeed  a school child could have asked the questions he did  do you get angry  did you ever think you would be pm  is your sense of humour intact  how do you manage with     hours of sleep we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowand if kumar doesn t deserve to join the bjp and get a lok sabha ticket after his rich tribute to pm modi    you are a lovely person  then nobody else does either.courtesy kumar s powers of interrogation  we learnt that modi didn t typically lose his temper but when angered  hid it well  that he has a sense of humour  illustrated by the joke he recounted and the number of times he laughed out loud during the interaction.modi also revealed that he had ambitions to join the army and take  sanyas   that he wasn t close to his mother  led a  detached  life  gave up most of his worldly belongings  didn t possess a bank account until he became an mla  but possessed friends in the opposition   mamata di gifted him kurtas  made do with     hours of sleep  and liked his cuppa chai at   am and   pm  under the open sky.oh  and former us president barack obama and he were so friendly they addressed each other as  tu    how did they do that in english the    odd minute chat took place at modi s residence    lok kalyan marg  where the t te   two began on the verandah and then shifted to the resplendent lawn for a tea for two. it was shot in true cinematic style   long overhead shots  dreamy soft focus shots through overarching trees  flowers in the foreground with the men at the centre  sipping tea.also read  narendra modi interview no exception. indian media rarely asks pms tough questionsthis is the second time in less than a week that modi has been portrayed as an affable host. times now  now times now world   was also invited to a garden tea party with him although the conversation then was strictly and openly political.note that the kumar interview is the second one given to an independent entity and not to a specific news channel or media house. this allows it to be telecast across news channels  like the ani interview of   january  with access to a much wider  national audience.while pm modi s media strategy is impeccable  congress president rahul gandhi s is virtually non existent   as the challenger  he ought to splurge on more screen time and projected himself as an alternative. his failure to appear in any interview suggests very poor media management. is he running shy  or what the bjp s pragya thakur is certainly not camera shy and since her nomination last week for the bhopal constituency against congress leader digvijaya singh  she has enjoyed as much screen time as modi   well  almost. the media is fascinated and repelled in equal measure by her and her remarks on police officer hemant karkare s death  india today   babri masjid or anything else so long as it gives them trps.so much so that even when one of the  world s deadliest terror attacks   the new york times  took place in sri lanka  sunday  tv news remained by her side and hung onto her every word.perhaps just as well. the coverage on cnn international was hardly enlightening. a cnn anchor asked the delhi correspondent to explain why christians  who were attacked  around the world  were the victims in sri lanka. he replied   there is no straightforward answer  that is what everyone is asking .also read  india sent   alerts to warn sri lanka ahead easter sunday attackwion was the first to have first hand accounts from the ground. its correspondent in colombo  monday  when another blast was heard  waxed excitable and full of foreboding   it s quite tense here  quite dramatic here  the situation is deteriorating fast it is tense and can be very dangerous also  ndtv      also sent out a reporter to the troubled island nation and even carried an interview with prime minister ranil wickremesinghe. the other channels didn t seem to care much in spite of    indians dying in the terrorist attacks.and finally  ipl  am i alone in thinking that after a decade  the tournament has made hitting   and watching   a sixer commonplace  now each time ms dhoni  andre russell or rishabh pant twitch their bats  we expect the maximum from them   if they hit four  we want to hit them for a six.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this election  modi has pitched himself as india s real life  terror fighting sunny deol
text size  a  a outside his voting booth in gujarat s gandhinagar tuesday morning  prime minister narendra modi couldn t resist contrasting the poll process and democracy with terrorism.  the voter s id is more powerful than the ied of the terrorist   he said  all perfectly safe words  but the implication was clear.vote me in if you want a safe and secure india  or for the opposition if you don t.in the shadow of the sri lanka easter sunday bomb blasts  which increasingly seems clear were carried out by the islamic fundamentalist group national towheeth jama ath   which is also believed to have links with the tamil nadu thawheed jama ath  pm modi s words are more than ominous.also read  bollywood stars and their readymade support base  why indian politics can t do without themcreation of fearas he seeks a second term  modi has resorted to the coarsest imagery to define himself. the balakot strikes  which were aimed at avenging the pulwama attacks gave him a renewed political lease of life. from all accounts  his personal popularity was down before pulwama  owing to reports of rampant joblessness and falling growth rates   and he has  since  cashed in on the fear.the fear of dying  not of natural causes and in the fitness of things  but from a sudden and horrendous terror attack that snuffs out precious life and permanently damages all those left behind.why  us  families of terror attack victims across the decades never cease to ask themselves. the roll call of horror never stops. its drumbeat can be felt across generations. delhi      . gujarat      . mumbai                  . kashmir  for decades. pathankot  uri  pulwama.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read   pakistan  terrorism  chowkidar    modi s favourite words in speeches after pulwama attackcreation of a saviourmodi s strategy to win is clear. he has cast himself in the image of the saviour who will both save and redeem india. save it from the bad people  both outside and inside the country.so  pakistani terrorists will be conflated not only with their masterminds in the pakistani establishment  the isi and army  but also  unfortunately  the people of pakistan. anyone who thinks differently is  anti national .as for the bad people inside india  the  terrorist   muslim  conflation happened a long time ago  since most terror groups and modules happen to be muslim. in this lok sabha election  modi has simply cut out all the complexities of whys and wherefores  and simplified the formula so it can fit into a tweet and reinforced.so  when pragya thakur  the bjp candidate from bhopal and chief accused in the malegaon blasts said it was her curse that killed police officer hemant karkare in the battle against pakistani terrorists that brought mumbai to its feet  modi did not utter one word.the silence from lok kalyan marg  where the pm lives in the heart of leafy delhi  is not only all pervasive  it chokes all those who dare to ask him any questions.modi responded to upset police officers by asking why the congress had questioned the heroism of one of their own  mohan sharma  the inspector who was killed in delhi s      batla house attack by an indian mujahideen terror module.so  why didn t modi defend hemant karkare who gave up his life fighting those very pakistani terrorists whom pm modi is keeping india safe from  in other circumstances  modi would have embraced karkare  called him a hero india was and remains proud of.but karkare made the cardinal sin of calling out the  saffron terror  of pragya thakur  an unfortunate phrase if ever there was one. after that  it didn t matter if he gave up his life fighting pakistani terrorists or not. he had to be condemned  if not by words   as that would be too dangerous  as words have power   then by a silence so forbidding that it swallows up all critics.also read  modi should know india s status as a nuclear weapon state demands responsible leadershipcreation of a herothis has been that kind of week. modi has spoken thousands and thousands of words  including on his willingness to use nuclear weapons against pakistan  an irresponsible comment if there was one. within    hours of bjp president amit shah describing the indian air force as  modi s air force   pm modi turned his journey to cast his vote into a veritable roadshow  expressly against election commission rules.and then there was sunny deol. the hero of action movies  like border and ghatak  in which the hero has no compunction fighting for mother india with bullets and brawn   unlike the soft romanticism of sunil dutt  who predictably went on to join the congress   is now the bjp candidate from the border constituency of gurdaspur.certainly  modi would have weighed in. if reel life is  indeed  real life  then voters will know that sunny is the  mukhauta  and modi is the real face beneath. perhaps  in this film  cardboard nuclear tipped missiles will be fired  but they are expected to cause real damage in real life.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




is rss wary of modi shah  a quiet  support  to raj thackeray in maharashtra signals so
text size  a  a what will narendra modi be doing in the last week of may  for better or worse  many of the predictions about the final number of seats to be won in this lok sabha elections have been about the bharatiya janata party. and setting the political analysts  and anyone with a number to pick  on a chase has been bjp president amit shah  who has predicted his party will win     seats when the results of the ongoing general elections are announced on    may.even if the bjp does not win as many seats as its leaders predict  many of them  citing several opinion polls  maintain that the national democratic alliance  nda  will reach the majority mark of    . that means narendra modi will be taking oath for a second term. columnists like meghnad desai and surjit bhalla have expressed confidence about modi s return   either with a majority for the bjp alone or through coalitions under the nda.but quite a few political pundits have begun to say that the bjp led nda won t cross even     seats. this means that the bjp spin doctors will have to mobilise about     more members to form a  stable  government. that indeed will put the system under huge convulsion and tension. post poll alliances are extremely difficult and even dubious.one can recall how the nda government led by atal bihari vajpayee and lal krishna advani in      and      remained in a limbo for almost a week when j jayalalitha played truant. there are many mavericks and self styled masterminds of political skulduggery  like subramaniam swami  who can disrupt the process. swami can raise a red flag by just seeing arun jaitley in the new firmament.also read  rss will decide if modi comes back to power or notthere are quite a few in the central hall or corporate conclaves or press clubs who say with considerable confidence that if the bjp alone is just around      then despite being the single largest party  modi won t return to the prime minister s office. the party itself will stop him in the tracks.the reason being  it is said  the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss  and the loyalists to the sangh do not want modi and amit shah. indeed  there are many who feel that raj thackeray s  toofan  against modi shah in maharashtra is backed by support from the top leadership of the sangh. thackeray s maharashtra navnirman sena is not contesting any seat in this lok sabha elections.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowpeople outside of maharashtra might not be aware of the fantastic whirlwind and highly aggressive campaign that raj thackeray had been leading against modi and amit shah  calling the duo a  threat to the nation . thackeray has taken a vow to make india  modi mukt . lakhs and lakhs of people are thronging to his rallies while the social media has been hailing him in a style usually reserved for rajinikanth.the bjp led nda could have anybody   from rajnath singh to nitin gadkari   replace the top two in the party s rank should the sangh parivar decide to sideline narendra modi and amit shah. this hypothesis is based on another presumption  that the rss does not want modi as he has become larger than life and unbearable to the party. such speculations do not require evidence or data.there are others who confidently say that even if bjp gets anywhere between     and     seats  modi can manoeuvre the magical figure of     by roping in biju janata dal  and meeting any demands of its leader navin patnaik  the chief minister of odisha  and by giving favourable signals to any of ysr congress  jagan mohan reddy s wishes. there are also people who predict like short term nostradamus that mayawati bahujan samaj party  bsp  will break its alliance with the samajwadi party  sp  to join modi led nda. after all  she had campaigned for modi in      after the gujarat pogrom.also read  raj thackeray wants a modi mukt bharat  and is shooting from congress ncp shoulderthere is also a doomsday like scenario painted by some observers. they say that modi will just not quit. with the help of the president  the election commission  the central bureau of investigation  cbi   a servile media and even the judiciary  modi will continue to be in charge. why  he can declare an emergency or summon the army to help him  govern .it is interesting that nobody says modi will sit on the opposition benches  or be ready to become the leader of the nda opposition. some do say that he would wait to let parliamentary chaos prevail and create situation for a mid term lok sabha election.already crafty calculations and conspiracy theories have begun to float. there are supposedly many brutus like characters  who can destabilise the roles of narendra modi  amit shah  kamal nath  sharad pawar  mayawati or even rahul gandhi  once redefining of the post poll alliances begin to take shape.apparently  unpredictable and unimaginable alliances spring up confounding the media and politicians themselves. for instance  in       atal bihari vajpayee could not continue as the prime minister because he had the support of only three parties  shiv sena  akali dal and haryana vikas manch   which wasn t enough. he could not get the needed numbers despite being his bjp emerging as the single largest party with     seats in the general elections.but the same bjp under vajpayee managed support of    parties just two years later  and the new nda was born. the hardcore anti bjp parties like the all india dravida munnetra kazghagam  aiadmk  in      and even the dmk in       after j jayalalithaa parted ways from the alliance   joined the vajpayee led government. later  chandrababu naidu  mamata banerjee  farooq abdullah as well as the stridently  anti communal  lohia school socialist like george fernandes became members of the vajpayee government. if atal bihari vajpayee can perform that rope trick  why not narendra modi  goes the argument.also read  whether or not modi remains pm in       a new political generation will slowly eclipse the oldopinion polls maintain that modi remains the most popular leader  more than the bjp  and that the balakot air strikes have made him a  braveheart  nationalist. even people in rural parts  about whom it is said that government policies and issues of daily life matter more  are believed to be seeing in him a  saviour of the nation . all of this leads some to say that nationalism and national security has gripped the electorate s psyche and is the dominating factor in this election.the detractors  however  say that real issues like  jobs  farmers  distress  gst and demonetisation related chaos and collapse of the small and medium industry are more important for the voters than nationalism. at least  i have not seen the nationalist frenzy in the parts i travelled. but who and what can we say about the so called silent voter after all indira gandhi and her congress were routed in      by the janata party and then the same janata party was demolished by indira gandhi in     . the bjp could win just two seats in       and yet could win     seats in      and     . nobody visualised the defeat of vajpayee s  shining india  government in     . and of course very few gave narendra modi a full majority in     .with this kind of electoral history  who can really say what narendra modi will be doing in the last week of may the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




retweeting modi increases bjp mps  chances of getting a lok sabha ticket  study
text size  a  a loyalty matters most for bjp members of parliament in getting renominated by the party to contest the      lok sabha elections. an analysis of tweets from     current bjp mps  collected in february       shows a correlation between loyalty to the party s leadership on twitter and whether or not a sitting mp was renominated for this year s elections.i analyse the rate at which a bjp mp retweeted the leadership in february     . the retweet rates of february      are a good benchmark for two reasons. first  it is more than a year before the general elections. we are  therefore  not observing retweets being conveniently used to make a good impression right before the elections. second  it was just before march       when the bjp urged its members to increase their online presence and grow their number of followers. i find that loyalty to the party and its leaders  not popularity on social media  is rewarded by party leadership with renomination.how much a bjp mp retweeted key members of the bjp is calculated as a percentage of their total number of tweets during the period for which data was collected. for example  if an mp tweeted      times and retweeted party leadership      times  the retweet rate for that mp is    per cent. then  mps are sorted by their retweet rates for members of bjp leadership. the key members of the bjp identified for this analysis were  prime minister narendra modi  the official bjp twitter account  bjp president amit shah  and cabinet members arun jaitley  sushma swaraj  rajnath singh  and uma bharti.of the top    per cent of mps who retweeted modi     per cent were renominated to contest for the lok sabha. in contrast  of the bottom    per cent of people who retweeted modi the least  only    per cent were renominated. this gives us a difference in renomination rates of    points. this trend holds true for the other key members of the bjp. figure   shows the difference in renomination rates in the bjp by the extent to which an mp retweeted key members of the cabinet  the official bjp twitter  modi  and amit shah. being in the top retweeters of the cabinet members all combined boosted renomination rates by    points. being in the top retweeters of the bjp increased renomination rates by    points. being in the top retweeters of amit shah boosted renomination rates by    points.also read  narendra modi govt turned to nehruvian strategy for india s economic growthit is possible that mps who retweet bjp leadership are just more popular on social media and  hence  are likely to be renominated because of their popularity. indeed  the bjp s strategy put forth by pm modi in march      was to increase its online presence by asking each mp to reach at least          genuine  followers on social media. this increases party engagement and allows the bjp to reach more voters  so it would be fair to hypothesise that mps with larger followings would be more likely to be rewarded with a ticket to contest.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin reality  however  as i show in figure    a large following on social media does not correlate with renomination rates. mps who have more than         followers were as likely to be renominated     per cent  as those who had less than that. of the mps who were renominated  three fourths had under         followers  and half had under       . those who had above         followers include cabinet members rajnath singh and sushma swaraj  whose substantial following    .  million and   .  million  respectively  skew results upwards. these findings also contradict how we tend to think about who gets renominated by the party. if we take online presence to reflect an mp s status in the bjp  their online status is irrelevant to get renominated.this analysis is limited by the fact that data was only available for     of     sitting bjp mps. it is also based on renominations as they have been announced so far  but new lists of candidates are still being released. in total          tweets were analysed. since some mps in the dataset tweeted more frequently than others  the percentage of retweets for each  as opposed to the raw number  was calculated to normalise scores. of course  the argument presented here is not causal. but if there is such a high correlation between twitter behaviour and political outcomes  it is worth investigating more closely the relationship between social media presence and bjp mobility.in this way  twitter is changing the landscape of indian elections. members of parliament may no longer need to be well connected to make sure they can get a ticket for the next election cycle. they may no longer need to be able to attract large crowds or even have overwhelming support in their respective constituencies.perhaps  they just need to retweet modi.also read   shehzada  rahul   ahmed  mian  aren t routine jibes on congress  they are modi s bigotrybarbara is a student at uc berkeley  majoring in political science.this analysis was done using tweets collected by anustubh agnihotri  samarth bansal  and rahul verma.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why congress  and not sp bsp  is prime target of modi and yogi in up
text size  a  a the bharatiya janata party s war cry in uttar pradesh is   up hee jitayega   which loosely translates to  it is up that will ensure our victory  in the      lok sabha elections. quite surprisingly  however  the duo of prime minister narendra modi and up chief minister yogi adityanath is targeting the congress more aggressively  and not the mahagathbandhan  or grand alliance  of once adversaries samajwadi party and bahujan samaj party. the congress s position in uttar pradesh is such that with two phases of polling done  it is being said that if the trio of rahul gandhi  priyanka gandhi vadra and jyotiraditya scindia manage to take the congress s tally beyond single digit mark in the state  it will be a huge achievement for them.so what explains the bharatiya janata party s focus on choosing the congress as its main rival in the hindi heartland state  which sends the maximum members        to the lok sabha  when political analysts are of the view that any loss for the bjp in up would mean a direct gain for the mahagathbandhan besides the fact that the bjp wants to project a pan indian clash between rahul gandhi and narendra modi  there s another significant factor behind this game plan of targeting the congress  the caste combination of uttar pradesh.also read  for bjp  uttar pradesh strongman rajnath singh best bet to tackle farmers  protestcaste has always been a dominant factor in the electorally crucial state. despite the current atmosphere of communal polarisation in the country  caste is still a deciding factor in most contests. developing political equations in up indicate that division of votes will not be as simple as it is being discussed. this time  the main electoral battle in up is being fought for a group  savarna  or the upper castes  which until now had not been explicitly marked as a  vote bank  for or by any political party. despite caste based polarisation in up since the early     s  savarna votes have remained fragmented. earlier  they used to be the main base for the congress with the bjp eating into its share in later years. both the sp and the bsp have their own core vote banks and neither the bjp nor the congress have found it easy to break them.in such circumstances  the congress s decision to field candidates from    seats is being seen as a ploy to dent the bjp s savarna base. according to the official survey  the upper caste population in up is about    per cent and the bjp s high hopes in the slogan    up hee jitayega    are linked to this figure. in the      lok sabha elections  a larger chunk of this    per cent was responsible for the bjp getting    per cent votes and    seats in the state. in that election  the combined vote share of the sp and the bsp  the parties were not in alliance  was also around    per cent. but the two are not together and any slice in the bjp s    per cent pie can be catastrophic to the party.now  let us have a broad look at the congress s list of candidates and its campaign strategy. it is quite clear that the congress is bent on luring away a bigger share of this    per cent savarna vote base. for example  in gautam budh nagar  the congress fielded its young gun arvind kumar singh against the bjp s sitting mp mahesh sharma and bsp s satvir nagar. locally  the fight was projected as  thakur vs. brahmin.  similarly  a brahmin candidate was put up against gen  retd  v.k. singh in ghaziabad in a bid to split savarna votes. to add to this  even the sp had fielded a savarna candidate  suresh bansal.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  why priyanka gandhi can be bjp s best friend in      lok sabha electionsin meerut  the same story played out. the bjp gave ticket to its incumbent mp rajendra agarwal while the congress countered his presence by fielding harendra agrawal. rumors abound that the titanic clash between these two baniya leaders has badly split the savarna vote  and that the bsp candidate  haji mohammad yakub  would prove to be the main beneficiary. the bsp is already in a solid position on this seat  which has five lakh muslim and  .  lakh dalit voters. similarly  in mathura  bjp s hema malini has been challenged by congress s mahesh pathak  the president of tirth purohit sangh  who has a huge clout among the brahmin voters.let s now move towards the eastern region of the state. rajesh mishra and devvrat mishra are the congress s candidates from salempur and jaunpur  respectively. both are capable of making a huge dent in bjp s savarna vote bank. similarly  in ghazipur  bjp s manoj sinha is facing a tough challenge from congress s ajit kushwaha  who is claiming support of  .   lakh kushwaha voters in the constituency. kushwahas have traditionally voted for the bjp but it s likely going to be different this time with the congress  candidate being the son of babu singh kushwaha  a well known leader and former minister in the up government.savarna voters also play a big role on prestigious seats of lucknow and varanasi. for the latter  whose incumbent is pm modi  the congress is yet to announce its candidate. in lucknow  which is held by union home minister rajnath singh  however  the congress has deputed acharya pramod krishnan  a tv debate veteran whose fame as the head of kalkipeeth and social position as a spiritual guru is sure to affect bjp s vote share. the sp bsp alliance  which is fielding poonam sinha   also a savarna   is hoping to benefit from yet another thakur brahmin clash. poonam sinha s husband  former bjp mp shatrughan sinha  is a kayastha while poonam herself belongs to a sindhi family. both these castes have a good presence in lucknow. while the kayastha numbers around  .  lakh  the sindhi community also has more than one lakh voters. with the help of the sp and bsp s traditional voters  poonam sinha can pose a serious challenge to rajnath singh in case of a split of the savarna votes.also read  why priyanka gandhi must take modi head on in varanasialthough defeating pm modi in varanasi is a monumental task  one could dare say even impossible  the congress is aiming for a close fight. amid the ever growing rumours that the congress could announce priyanka gandhi vadra as its cahllnege to modi  there are also talks about a  mahant  of a famous temple in the city being a possible contender. the name  though not made known  is of someone considered to be  a liberal brahmin . interestingly  it has never been easy to gauge the shift in the mood  if any  of people in a city where  .  lakh brahmins co inhabit with   lakh muslims.ever since yogi adityantah   a rajput by birth   took the chief minister s chair of uttar pradesh  stories of thakur brahmin clashes for dominance are buzzing in up s power corridor. the bjp s lucknow office is rife with stories of brahmins being neglected under the current regime  both central as well as in up. acts such as denying tickets to veteran brahmin leaders like murali manohar joshi and kalraj mishra have added some credit to these stories. the sentiments were further hurt when ambedkar nagar mp hariom pandey and sant kabir nagar mp sharad triptahi  infamous for beating an mla with shoes  too were left high and dry. hariom is believed to be so annoyed with the bjp leadership that he has leveled serious allegation against the party that he had been asked to pay money to get the ticket. hariom has also gone public with his accusations that the bjp was neglecting brahmin leadership.overall  the congress is looking to benefit from this situation. its intention is to dent this    per cent savarna vote share and demolish the base of bjp s    per cent share it received in up in the last general elections. the alliance of the sp  the bsp and the rashtriya lok dal too can hope to benefit in seats where it has fielded a savarna candidate. everywhere else  the upper caste votes will be shared by the bjp and the congress  and the latter s ability to wean a larger chunk of this vote will mean danger for the bjp  which could end up losing more seats than it is currently anticipated. this strategy may not yield any large number of seats for the congress  it can queer the pitch for the bjp. for the congress  any damage to the bjp in up is sufficient to emerge as a big player in delhi. and so  while the bjp seems hard pressed to confront this two frontal attack from the mahagathbandhan as well as the congress  it is the likelihood of the bigger damage it could face from the congress that makes it chalk up a strategy focused largely on the nehru gandhi family.the author is a senior journalist.this article is translated from hindi. the original can be read here. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




 shehzada  rahul   ahmed  mian  aren t routine jibes on congress  they are modi s bigotry
text size  a  a at a recent rally in maharashtra s wardha  prime minister narendra modi took to the stage to publicly decry congress president rahul gandhi s decision to contest from wayanad in kerala  by suggesting that he was  running away from majority dominated areas  to  take refuge in areas where the majority is in minority . inspired  his colleagues were quick to parrot their leader s line with bjp president amit shah calling wayanad a place  where when a procession is taken out  you cannot make out whether it is india or pakistan  and uttar pradesh chief minister yogi adityanath remarking that the congress believes that  ali  prophet mohammed s son in law  will help them in the polls ..but we think that bajarang bali  lord hanuman  will help us .not that this is the first instance where modi has targeted the congress president or the party in such a manner. at an earlier stage when he publicly derided rahul gandhi  then vice president of the party  as a princeling  he did not use the hindi term  rajkumar   preferring the persian and urdu  shehzada  instead  as if to further damn gandhi by association with islamic terminology. when rahul gandhi was appointed as party president in december       modi insinuated that his appointment would mark the beginning of an  aurangzeb raj  in the party.more frequently  modi has not shied away from labelling the congress as a party of  muslim men   and also an  anti hindu  party  and has on multiple occasions reiterated his hollow accusation of  minority appeasement  that he so often mocks the congress for.also read  the modi playbook  delay in pm condemning attacks on kashmiris is part of a patternto be sure  modi s deplorable obsession with peddling this divisive cocktail of communal messaging is not a new trend and has been documented several times in the last decade. but it is still remarkable how pronounced his bigotry gets when an election is around the corner.in the immediate aftermath of the      godhra riots  when the state went into elections  as the bjp s cm candidate  modi openly suggested that there was an active collaboration between muslims in gujarat and pakistani chief  mian  musharraf. then in september  while campaigning during his gujarat gaurav yatra  on the note of family planning  modi mocked muslims in his state with his  hum paanch  hamaare pachees  comment suggesting that muslims were out to multiply their numbers to reverse their minority status in the state. in the      and the      campaigns  the  mian  barb was resurrected  this time as  ahmed mian   a reference to the faith of congress leader ahmed patel. as recently as last week  at a rally in kathua  modi attacked jammu and kashmir s former chief ministers thus   i will not allow the abdullahs and the muftis to divide the country. even constitutional authorities have not been spared  modi has not previously demurred from targeting the election commission of india itself. in the      campaign  when the ec  wary of the communal tensions in the state  refused modi s call for early elections  as the cm  the latter launched a barely veiled tirade against then chief election commissioner j.m lyngdoh  highlighting his christian background and suggesting that he was favouring minorities in the state by not calling for early state elections  prompting a sharp dressing down from his own party colleague and then prime minister atal bihari vajpayee.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  rahul gandhi is as polarising as modi but indian liberals won t use that word for himthis is not just a diatribe about how modi and his bjp have lowered the level of political discourse in india  it is to point out how exactly they do it. in cricket nowadays  the umpires use a  soft signal  when they are unsure of a verdict on an appeal but want to convey to the tv umpire what they really think. this is exactly what modi is up to  he actively signals his bigotry to his base without necessarily being overt about his distaste for minorities.during the      bihar assembly elections  there was his exhortation not to vote for the rjd  twisting its leader lalu prasad s words to say he had  insulted yaduvanshis  by calling them  beef eaters . two years later  in uttar pradesh  there was his  kabristan shamshaan  comment and his  if there is electricity during ramzaan there should be electricity during diwali   innocuous enough till one recognises the implicit communal message packaged within . in the same year  during the      gujarat assembly elections  modi repeatedly accused his predecessor manmohan singh and former vice president hamid ansari of colluding with pakistan with the aim of defeating the bjp in the polls. both statements were designed with the specific intent of polarising the electorate prior to the elections. in       in the midst of the karnataka state elections  modi hit out at the congress   celebration of the jayantis of sultans   a reference to the celebration of tipu jayanti in the state.this brings us to the foundational paradox of narendra modi that i have documented extensively in my own book  the paradoxical prime minister. it is striking that the modi who assured a gathering of muslim leaders in      that even if they were to knock on his doors at midnight  he would respond  is the same modi who refuses to wear a muslim skullcap when one is presented to him  while cheerfully donning all manner of exotic headgear wherever he goes . silence is also a weapon of soft signalling  when he refuses to condemn instances of communal violence  he implicitly condones it.also read  pulwama balakot helps modi in polls   issues of farmers  jobs  rafale don t exist anymorethe modi who has effusively embraced muslim heads of state in the arab world  is the same modi who keeps indian muslims at arm s length. never before      had a political party in india won a majority at the centre without a single muslim representing it in the lok sabha  till modi s bjp achieved that dubious distinction. this was all the more astonishing in that    of its seats in the lower house came from uttar pradesh  where nearly a fifth of the state s population are muslims. the very fact that the bjp finds itself unable to put up electable muslim candidates in any constituency speaks volumes about the party s attitude to muslims and of the attitudes of indian muslims to it as well as of the views of its core voters  whose bigotry would not predispose them to vote for a muslim  not even one contesting on their own party s symbol.modi needs to stop this divisive and infantile practice. the incumbent of   and again aspirant for   the country s top post must be above such bigotry. as rahul gandhi has shown he understands  his language should demonstrate an appreciation that a prime minister of india must be a leader of all indians and not one with an ostentatiously displayed blind spot for certain minorities. our country deserves better than the bjp s torch bearer for bigotry that modi has become  a position from where he has sadly lost the moral integrity to lead this nation.dr shashi tharoor is a member of parliament for thiruvananthapuram and former mos for external affairs and hrd. he served the un as an administrator and peacekeeper for three decades. he studied history at st. stephen s college  delhi university  and international relations at tufts university. tharoor has authored    books  both fiction and non fiction  his most recent book is the paradoxical prime minister. follow him on twitter  shashitharoor. views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




environment is the most under reported disaster of narendra modi government
text size  a  a climate change  pollution and biodiversity destruction are some of the most urgent challenges  and a new generation of revolutionary activists are fighting them.but most political leaders in the world remain lethargic in taking action. and then there are some leaders like prime minister narendra modi who have started an all out war against environment in the last five years.this is also the most under reported failure of the modi government. the opposition parties have raised issues like unemployment and farmer crisis  but not environment. the previous upa government didn t have much of a stellar record on environment anyway  but what has happened in past five years is unprecedented  which i have mentioned in my facebook post as well.the biggest statistical evidence for this lies in the environmental performance index  where india was ranked the fourth worst country       in the world out of     countries last year. five years ago  india was ranked    th.also read  why covering the environment is one of the most hazardous beats in journalismthe assault began as soon as the modi government took over in      with the promise of speeding business decisions and removing hurdles to investment. in june       the environment ministry used a bureaucratic shortcoming to remove the ban on setting up of factories in eight  critically polluted  industrial belts  which was reported in business standard.environment clearances were eased to allow mid sized polluting industries to operate within   km of eco sensitive areas  as against the earlier limit of    km. norms for coal tar processing  sand mining  paper pulp industries were also eased.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowin august       the number of independent members in national board for wildlife  nbwl  was reduced from    to just three. more government members in this board meant more government influence   a decision that many say was key to the environmental damage that was to follow. the new nbwl was a mere puppet of the government. five years later we saw the result   nbwl approved   .   per cent of all industrial projects  giving them environmental clearance. a total of     projects were allowed from the     projects it had to examine. in contrast  under upa    only    per cent of the projects got clearance       were allowed out of     projects.the next assault came on    december      when central pollution control board wrote to over     thermal power units in the country  allowing them to release pollutants in violation of the      limits set by the government  which were to be followed till another five years. it also wanted newer thermal power plants to follow the new norms of clean technologies set by the government. but as scroll reported   even the    new power stations that became operational in      had failed to install clean technologies .it comes as no surprise that by          of the world s    most polluted cities were in india.in july       the government tried to undermine the independence of india s environmental watchdog   the national green tribunal. in the past  ngt has often raised pointed questions about anti environment projects. it is able to do so only because of the autonomy it enjoys. it can only be headed by a former supreme court judge or the chief justice of a high court. but the modi government  through the provision of a money bill  tweaked the rules  allowing a five member committee  wherein four members could be from the government  to choose the chairperson of ngt. under the new rules  anyone with  at least    years of experience in law  could head the ngt.fortunately  this disastrous move was stayed by the supreme court.also read  computers  the environment   lunar mining   how well isaac asimov predicted     laws were changed systematically across the states and at the centre. modi government declassified salt pans as wetlands. this move threatens to open up vast lands of salt pans near mumbai for housing projects.in bjp ruled goa  the state government classified the coconut tree as a grass so that it can be cut without taking permission   a move  many suspected  would benefit the real estate sector. fortunately  the decision was overturned in     .in       the environment ministry proposed major changes to the national forest policy  announced a draft coastal regulation zone  crz  notification and came up with new rules for plastic waste management. all three moves  seen as benefitting the industry  were criticised by environmental activists.the fight in gurgaon to save the aravali and the fight in mumbai to save aarey have been documented by the media. these are the last frontiers in this war because these bio diversity sites are the last remaining green areas in the two cities.acts of environmental destruction are being committed across india. a wildlife sanctuary is about to be erased from the face of the earth. in september       uttar pradesh government submitted a proposal to the modi government asking for the  kachhua   turtle  wildlife sanctuary in varanasi to be  denotified . if this proposal is cleared  this wildlife sanctuary will be the first to be erased since the wildlife protection act       was introduced.in madhya pradesh  the proposed ken betwa river linking project threatens to destroy       hectare of panna tiger reserve  a home to critically endangered gharial species.in maharashtra         precious mangrove trees will be cut for the famous bullet train project. in uttarakhand  another environmental disaster took place as        trees were cut in an ecologically sensitive area for building highways to hindu pilgrimage sites. this drastically increased the threat of landslides in an already vulnerable region.in chhattisgarh  one of the most pristine and dense forests of india is about to be eliminated as the government has given permission for coal mining.i can go on and on. one ecologically sensitive area after another has been destroyed while laws have been twisted and turned  again and again.also read  the biggest environmental threat to people s lives is now the airthe new bjp manifesto for      elections provides no respite from this ongoing assault. under the forest and environment section  it boasts of  speed and effectiveness in issuing forest and environmental clearances . this is a catchy euphemism for prioritising construction and industry over ecology and biodiversity. after all  this goes with the  ease of doing business  achievements and voters can be convinced that this is a good thing. there isn t much on biodiversity protection  there is no commitment towards making india s environmental institutions more independent and laws more effective.our voice is key in the environment debate. more of us need to be champions of the planet.the author is an activist and youtuber. the views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why priyanka gandhi must take modi head on in varanasi
text size  a  a suspense is the word congress president rahul gandhi has used to answer whether priyanka gandhi vadra will contest the lok sabha election from varanasi against prime minister narendra modi.suspense is often what the congress party has to offer. it keeps building up suspense for weeks and months and sometimes years  only to become a diwali fire cracker that fails to light up. phuss  it s called colloquially.one recent example of this was the proposed alliance with the aam aadmi party  aap  in delhi. another is how the rumour of priyanka gandhi entering public life carried on for so many years it didn t have meaning.when the congress did launch priyanka  at the fag end of modi s first term  it was too late for her to make any impact. she and her brother both made it clear they were looking at the      assembly election in uttar pradesh  implying they knew priyanka wasn t going to have much impact in up in      lok sabha election. this is how the congress undermines itself  all the time.the list of things the congress party gets wrong is long. but there are a few things it is as poor in as timing. it doesn t know when to strike. when the iron is hot  the congress party goes into a slumber.also read  this election  a lot of people are rooting for a weak modidon t chicken out of ithow about varanasi  priyanka gandhi casually told congress workers in raebareli last month. having created the suspense herself  she must not chicken out of it now. already  bjp mouthpieces who call themselves news channels have been hyping up the idea of priyanka gandhi contesting from varanasi  so they can later say she lost her nerve.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowif priyanka gandhi now decides to not contest from varanasi  it will make modi appear even stronger   in varanasi and india alike. the unmistakable message will be the congress doesn t have the fire in its belly to fight the modi juggernaut.it is unlikely that priyanka gandhi could win varanasi if she were to contest. but she ll definitely give narendra modi a tough fight. at any rate a tougher fight than  say  the local congress favourite  ajay rai. priyanka gandhi can at best hope to bring down the margins. the contest will be one of margins. there is no reason why varanasi will want not want to be represented by the likely prime minister for a second term.yet the benefit of priyanka gandhi taking on narendra modi will be that this election will look like a contest after all. it will energise not just the congress but opposition forces across the country. the prevailing sense of an absent national opposition will change.also read  in maiden rally  priyanka gandhi vadra takes on pm modi on his home turfin the      lok sabha elections  the bjp put up smriti irani in amethi  against rahul gandhi. narendra modi went and campaigned there. the idea was to impact the national political narrative by suggesting that the bjp is so resurgent  it is willing to go and attack the congress on its home turf. that is also what the congress could achieve by taking on modi in varanasi.over a few weeks in varanasi  priyanka gandhi s campaign will help voters across india get a better chance to compare the two sides. it might even help us answer the tina question. is there really no alternative who s afraid of priyanka that is not to say that priyanka gandhi should or could come to be seen as a prime ministerial candidate. but at least a high profile pgv vs namo campaign will help the congress articulate its position better. at a time when the bjp has established a monopoly over the means of mass communication and political campaigning  priyanka gandhi in varanasi will help the congress hog the limelight  get saturation media coverage  and occupy people s minds.on    may  we should be ready to hear that priyanka gandhi too has flopped  because under her command the congress isn t about to see a revolution in central and east up. by contesting from varanasi  she can save her own career. she can establish her image as a politician at least willing to put up a fight.also read  priyanka gandhi vadra launches political career  but talk is all about indiraaap national convener and delhi chief minister arvind kejriwal may have lost varanasi in      but people there still remember what a challenge he had mounted.  the people of varanasi don t disappoint anyone. they are always welcoming of outsiders   a local journalist told me. varanasi is a city of possibilities. who knows the impossible may happen  it is a bjp stronghold all right  but the congress did win a surprise victory in the      lok sabha election.nominations can be filed between    and    april. varanasi votes on    may in the last phase. if the idea of priyanka gandhi contesting from varanasi is to lift the congress campaign nationally  then it is already late. two of seven phases are over. time is running out but the congress is never in a hurry. if not this election then the next one.suspense is not a bad thing  rahul gandhi says. it reminds one of former prime minister pv narasimha rao s famous line  that not taking a decision is also a decision. priyanka gandhi has made it clear she is up for it. but party president and dear brother rahul gandhi is hatching eggs on the idea.most likely  he will tell her to let modi win varanasi without any trouble. after all  rahul gandhi has the most to lose with the success of priyanka gandhi.the views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




bleak record on economy   the reason modi s bjp has returned to communal politics
text size  a  a five years after narendra modi swept to power in a landslide election victory  and as he again faces the voters  we should ask  has he delivered on his campaign promises of acche din and  minimum government  maximum governance  in       most commentators  and i include myself  didn t interrogate modi s promises carefully enough  allowing him to get away with catchy slogans that may not have had any substance in them. be that as it may  it s incumbent on us now to move beyond the marketing  at which this government excels  and examine its record.start with the shiny new gross domestic product  gdp  statistics  which would have you believe that the fastest growth under this government happened in the year of the disruptive shock of demonetisation. serious economists and now even the international monetary fund for the first time have questioned this data. even if we buy them     growth should be seen as a baseline scenario and not a success. meanwhile  all other indicators point to an economy stuck in the mud.consider modi s promise of making india a global trade and manufacturing hub. the reality is that the trade to gdp ratio peaked in      in the supposedly bad old days of the united progressive alliance  upa  and has been trending down ever since. it s now as low as    . likewise  foreign direct investment  fdi  as a share of gdp peaked at    in        under the upa and is hovering a little above    under modi. india has actually been de globalising on modi s watch  made worse by the ham handed return to protectionism and import substitution which was tried for decades and then discarded in     .in the latter days of the upa  modi and the bharatiya janata party  bjp  made political hay from the fact that the rupee was going down against the us dollar. modi even joked that the rupee was in the intensive care unit  icu . the truth is  even at the height of the  taper crisis  in       the exchange rate stood at   . . today it s roughly at   . if the rupee was in the icu in       it s now officially dead and buried.also read  socialism  not secularism  is the central fault line of indian politicsbefore the      election  modi was widely hailed by the markets for his supposedly pro business stance. but the reality is that the modi government has interfered more with business and commerce even than the upa  exemplified by the cumbersome and botched gst implementation. consider that the nifty     corporate profit to gdp ratio has been sliding ever since modi and the bjp took power  and is at a    year low  even worse than under the upa in     .we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowlikewise  news headlines screaming that the sensex is hitting record highs misses the fact that annualised average total returns were  .   from           and have risen only to  .   from            a tiny difference.as for demonetisation  it utterly failed to achieve its goals to reduce corruption  increase tax compliance and move to a less cash driven economy. the main impact was negative  to cause lasting damage to the large informal sector.yet  perhaps the most insidious and long lasting damage wrought by the bjp in the past five years is the degradation of institutions  to the point where they ve been politicised beyond recognition   everything from the armed forces to the central bank. institutions in india have always been weak  but far from strengthening them  as his campaign rhetoric suggested he would do  modi has done more to capture institutions than the upa ever did.also read  voters rebelling over pollution  jobs  growth threaten bjp in tamil naduwith such a bleak record  it is no wonder that the bjp has returned to communal politics like never before  openly pushing a hindu supremacist agenda.if the bjp s      election campaign was marked by a narrative of hope  aspiration and change  its      counterpart has been angry and polarising. voters have to ask themselves why  and what this ugly campaign foretells for the nation if the bjp wins again.rupa subramanya is an economist based in mumbaiby special arrangement withsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




immature  traitor   modi agent  how pakistan sees imran khan for his bjp love this election
text size  a  a pakistan prime minister imran khan s statement in support of narendra modi for a second term could well be a congress ploy  according to india s defence minister nirmala sitharaman. but this claim of a conspiracy adds to the woes of imran khan  whose words are not being taken as very smart back home in pakistan.academics  lawyers and journalists of pakistan are calling imran khan s remark a diplomatic blunder while leaders of islamist parties have started dubbing him as  modi ka yaar and ghaddar   friend of modi and traitor    a slogan imran khan had repeatedly chanted to taunt his main political opponent nawaz sharif during the election campaign of july     .with no let up in criticism  pakistan foreign minister shah mahmood qureshi had to clarify that imran khan was quoted out of context  but this has failed to produce the desired effect on khan s political opponents.perhaps  this is why the sindh assembly  pakistan s second largest provincial assembly  monday passed a resolution against pm khan  less than a week after his pro bjp statement  declaring him an  election agent  of pm modi.also read  imran khan s  support  for modi shows bjp has walked into its own pakistan trap if someone expects that the bjp government will be helpful to resolve  the  kashmir issue  then he lives in fool s paradise   says dr hasan askari  a leading political scientist.but askari is quick to dispel notions that imran khan s statement will create any domestic trouble for the bjp. askari knows that the bjp enjoys the support  mostly of right wingers .  you know  this kind of vote bank remains intact in almost all cases   says the former caretaker chief minister of punjab  pakistan.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowkhan was  led  by global playersthe matter  however  is not quite as simple as people have made it out to be. abid saqi  the former president of lahore bar association  claims pm imran khan did not seem to assert the  conventional wisdom  that right wing parties take bold steps to resolve domestic and international issues   the  nixon goes to china  argument   and nor did he make an abrupt statement similar to his past record.saqi said that imran khan made the comment based on the sense of assurance provided by the international powers.in a private conversation with me  the senior lawyer clamed that islamabad was assured by global powers during the recent face off between india and pakistan following the    february pulwama attack that they will help resolve the kashmir issue after narendramodi is re elected as india s prime minister. a settlement on the lines of much debated musharraf vajpayee formula could be agreed between india and pakistan if the bjp again comes into power   saqi said.also read  pakistan releasing abhinandan for peace but imran khan isn t optimistic about modithen there are some who say imran khan acted immaturely by making a statement that seasoned politicians would always steer clear of. since he is not acquainted with diplomatic wisdom and norms  he voiced his opinion about modi openly. pakistan and india are presently in a state of war under modi s regime and wishing him another tenure is manifestation of confusion on diplomatic front   says shoaib saleem  another senior lawyer and writer.saleem points to the political obstacle a statement like this creates for imran khan.  what if  rahul gandhi s  congress led alliance wins the elections   the lawyer s question imagines the scenario where  after endorsing the bjp  imran khan is in a situation where he might have to initiate a dialogue on the kashmir issue   but with the congress instead of the bjp. in a political advice of sorts  saleem tells imran khan to  learn at the earliest  that it s the state  and not individuals  that matters.  modi s alleged friendship with nawaz sharif was detrimental for pakistan but imran khan s longing for him will cure our core issue  this is nothing less than a paradox. religious leaders weigh in tooimran khan has similarly irked the islamists who lashed out at him  saying there was  zero chance  of any resolution of the kashmir issue if modi s bjp wins the election for the second term.jamaat e islami central leader ameerul azeem says that at a time when the bjp was bent upon repealing article      pakistan s prime minister wished for the party to come into power.also read  imran khan s statement on bjp victory an attempt to influence polls with reverse swing  pm modiazeem says imran khan s endorsement of modi came on  the directions of the international lobby and business tycoon who wanted to see modi in power .the condemnation of pm khan s statement by tehreek e labbaik pakistan  which emerged as the biggest religious party in terms of vote bank in pakistan s general election of       comes with indian and kashmiri muslims in mind. spokesperson ijaz ashrafi flayskhan for  rubbing salt on  their  wounds by issuing statement in favour of modi .supporters say  avoidable but such widespread condemnation doesn t mean imran khan is left all alone in pakistan. some like sohail warraich  a leading journalist and tv anchor  reiterate pm khan s statement verbatim because they were  timely and accurate   while some like iqtidar gilani  a journalist from the nation  say the pm was  right in his claim  but could have avoided voicing it out nevertheless.according to warraich  khan did not intentionally issue the statement to create some damage to the bjp s poll campaign. a party like the congress will not go to the extreme due to fear of backlash from the right wing parties. the past experience strengthens this idea. the congress ruled india for such a long time and during that period  we saw meaningless dialogue. it was during the bjp s rule that pervez musharraf and atal bihari vajpayee reached close to an agreement on the kashmir issue   says iqtidar gilani.samiullah randhawa  a journalist from daily times  also hoped that modi and khan could better resolve the disputes between the two nations.the author is a lahore based journalist. he writes on religion  politics  culture  agriculture and partition. he can be reached  imiftikharalam. the views are personal.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




raj thackeray wants a modi mukt bharat  and is shooting from congress ncp shoulder
text size  a  a maharashtra s political circle seemed to be working overtime to establish the role of maharashtra navnirman sena chief raj thackeray  who earlier this month announced support to the alliance between the congress and the nationalist congress party in the lok sabha elections. by the end of last week  it had found in an old bollywood song a complete analogy for the thackeray gone rogue   begani shadi me abdulla deewana   which received endorsement by chief minister devendra fadnavis no less. raj thackeray s speeches targeting the party  but especially prime minister narendra modi  whom he had even mimicked to rapturous applause at a recent public gathering  have rankled the bjp quite a lot.but for someone whose party has no candidate in the fray  raj thackeray s eagerness to speak for the congress led alliance begs the question  why   because i want to build an india that is free of modi    or  in the pm s parlance  a  modi mukt bharat . thackeray says his maharashtra navnirman sena  mns  had worked in the last lok sabha elections for a  modi yukt bharat   but because modi has  backstabbed his supporters   he has decided to work towards ridding india of modi in     .but while the ever popular raj thackeray continues to draw impressive crowd at his gatherings  and wants to project his  modi mukt bharat  mission as genuine  some people are still annoyed with him.  what do we do with his speeches   a leader of the  secular  alliance  the congress  the ncp  a few smaller parties and at least one independent  told me.   his speeches  are more damaging to us than they are to modi  it is true that he is a skillful orator and his satires are sharp  but the historical trend suggests that while people gather in great numbers to hear him  they usually go and vote for others   the leader added.also read  the loneliness of raj thackeray   to ally or not  to contest elections or notthe alliance leader even takes a potshot at the mns  election symbol  rail engine.   raj thackeray s political position  is the reason why the mns s election symbol has no bogey attached to it. why should we extend our platform to a leader who doesn t enjoy a good political image  his image is also not good. some people call him political entertainer while others have labeled him a stand up comedian. the mockery and sneers hurled at raj thackeray forced me to take my query to another political leader   what is your issue with the mns chief s political speeches for lok sabha       is it worth openly mocking the inheritor of bal thackeray s legacy  the leader replied   what else do you expect from us  raj thackeray s mns is not contesting even a single seat this time. the party had lost all the seats it had contested in      lok sabha and assembly elections. some candidates won the corporation election by mistake but even they moved over to the shiv sena. now  raj and his rail engine are all alone. there is not a single coach attached to it. he could not find a single candidate to contest  the      general elections  on an mns ticket. after all  who wants to contest an election when even their deposits are not safe  several times we have told raj thackeray that navnirman  reconstruction  is not the way in politics.  dhan nirman   money making  is also important. we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  raj thackeray  .  is talking in hindi to north indians  courting sharad pawarthe leader elaborated   things have now gone overboard. his party is not contesting elections  yet his habit of making speeches forces him to open his mouth every now and then. he is in a great dilemma about what to do now. for him  not contesting elections is fine  but not giving speeches is unfathomable. even a proper sleep alludes him if he hasn t delivered a provocative speech or two. raj thackeray is paying a huge price to satisfy his desire for political speeches. it may cost him all that he possesses.at one time  raj thackeray used to be a proud shiv sainik  but his changed stance reduced his stature to a  sharad sainik   soldier of sharad pawar s army . there is a backstory to this  too. there was a time when raj thackeray used to rule the hearts of millions of shiv sainiks and nursed a grand ambition to be the uncontested leader of shiv sena. now  all that is a thing of the past. the great dynasty demon has corrupted indian politics in a big way and no political leader wants to share the spoils of power even within the extended family. raj thackrey is also a victim of this political tragedy. when he joined the shiv sena  every shiv sainik was enthralled. for them  he was goddess bhawani s blessing sent to inherit the illustrious legacy of his uncle  bal thackeray.his facial features were an exact match to his fiery uncle. in several ways  raj thackeray was a natural successor of bal thackeray and he tried to adopt whatever else he required to. he turned into an energetic leader and his oratorical skills had same satirical punch. he also started drawing cartoons  bal thackeray was a celebrated cartoonist of his time  but the younger thackeray forgot one important political reality  sometimes even a cartoonist turns into a cartoon. the mns chief learnt everything except bal thackeray s political astuteness  which was grasped by bal thackeray s son uddhav thackeray  the present shiv sena chief. it is not a matter of surprise that uddhav outwitted raj   after all  even the famous duo of modi shah has been forced to compromise with uddhav on his terms.also read  uddhav thackeray is the new hamlet in maharashtra politicshence  it is not surprising that raj thackeray  who was once a hero for the common shiv sainiks  is now a political zero. another bollywood song from raj kapoor s epic mera naam joker aptly summarises the current situation faced by raj thackrey  kabhi kabhi hero ko joker ban jana padta hai. for long  shiv sainiks as well as political observers had believed that raj thackeray would be the ultimate winner of political game of thrones inside shiv sena. and yet  he had to quit and was forced to launch the mns. in order to enhance his political acceptability  he also replaced the shiv sena s saffron flag with the mns  chequered one. secularism replaced hindutva for political ideology. raj rolled back shiv sena s strategy by four decades and aggressively adopted the stand of being pro marathi manus. he had to launch a vicious campaign against biharis and other north indians because common marathas could not identify with his bland no hindutva brand of politics.but all this could not deliver any electoral windfall.perhaps  the mns chief s desire to make a  modi mukt bharat  stems from the fact that modi supporters and bjp voters have already created a raj thackeray free maharashtra. today  the mns has no member in parliament or the legislative assembly. there were some corporates but they too went over to the shiv sena. so  what raj thackeray wants is revenge.but besides not being taken seriously enough  what is adding to his miseries is the election commission s foul mood. the poll panel has enquired about the expenses on his rallies. so many forces are attacking maharashtra s once indisputable hero  who  despite everything  hasn t given up yet. like the main protagonist of hindi film gully boy  raj thackeray continues to believe   apna time aayega  apna time aayega the author is former news editor of jansatta  mumbai  and deputy bureau chief of jansatta  delhi. he has also authored  isis aur islam mein civil war .this article was first published in theprint hindi   theprinthindi . the original can be read here.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




here s what we know for sure about jobs   unemployment under modi govt
text size  a  a as nearly a billion indians go to the polls this month and next  no one doubts jobs will be central to their vote. we just can t agree on whether the employment picture is rosy or dark. while the government cites payroll data to claim significant job creation  the opposition holds up a leaked preliminary report that pegged unemployment in      at  .  percent  which if true would be the highest rate in    years.it might be more useful instead to concentrate on the most recent numbers we can all agree on  which come from a government survey of over         households across india between april and december of     . although dated   it was conducted before demonetization and the introduction of a nationwide goods and services tax   the survey reveals several interesting things about employment in india  including one trend of particular relevance to policymakers and another to jobseekers.the data suggest that  at least in       unemployment hovered around   percent. more worryingly  the labor force participation rate stood at an unusually low    percent  meaning only half the working age population was actively working or seeking employment. by comparison  china s labor participation rate averaged    percent from      to     . rates in other emerging asian economies such as vietnam     percent   indonesia     percent   thailand     percent  and bangladesh     percent  are typically much higher as well.among those who are participating  the situation varies greatly depending on where they live. dynamic states which are actively improving their ease of doing business   including chhattisgarh   .  percent   karnataka   .  percent  and gujarat   .  percent    recorded the lowest unemployment rates. by contrast  progressive states that have scored well on human development indicators such as literacy and maternal health don t seem to be great job creators  unemployment in kerala came in at   .  percent  while in tripura and himachal pradesh it stood at   .  percent and   .  percent respectively. not surprisingly  these states have lagged in improving their business environment.the trend holds true when one drills down into specific categories of workers as well. it s remarkable that states that have generally fared well on social indicators nevertheless register alarmingly high levels of female unemployment   as high as    percent in kerala. by contrast  the states generating most jobs have spread the wealth to women as well as men  karnataka  chhattisgarh and gujarat have female unemployment rates as low as   percent   .  percent  and  .  percent respectively.  even there  however  the rates of female labor force participation remain disturbingly low  as they do across the country. similarly  while unemployment is higher among youth in india    .  percent  than those over    years of age   .  percent   as it is in much of the world  economically dynamic states have also found jobs for younger workers. gujarat   .  percent  and karnataka   .  percent  have the least youth unemployment  while states which rank low on the ease of doing business  including kerala    .  percent   himachal pradesh     percent  and tripura    .  percent  report particularly high levels of youth unemployment.if all that should persuade politicians from all parties of the need to focus on eliminating red tape and promoting investment friendly policies  the numbers also contain sobering lessons for new job seekers. what stands out is how concentrated unemployment is among the most educated young indians. unlike in developed economies  where jobs increasingly flow to the better educated  in india the trend is the opposite. nearly    percent of indian youth who possess graduate degrees and above are unemployed  while relatively uneducated young workers   .  percent unemployment  are doing much better. a highly educated indian youth is more than five times as likely to be unemployed as an uneducated one.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhy might this be  the gap probably says something about the quality of the jobs being created  with most involving mundane or repetitive tasks. it also says something about the quality of indian education  too many engineers and other professionals are waving around degrees that are relatively worthless.the latter raise expectations without providing necessary skills  so graduates prefer to remain unemployed rather than accept work that seems beneath their station. some believe their time is better spent preparing for further tests and qualifications so they can  for instance  win particularly prized positions such as those in the government.leaders certainly have a responsibility to improve education and to generate more high quality jobs. until they do  however  at least some indian youth need to think harder about whether a vocational education would serve them better than a fine sounding degree. a little realism might brighten the jobs picture just a bit.   bloombergalso read  modi   bjp have chosen not to counter congress s claims on jobs  and it s the right strategysubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




as the world grieves over notre dame  modi missing in action
text size  a  a donald trump  angela merkel and theresa may. barack obama and hilary clinton. even iran s foreign minister javad zarif. the world s leaders are mourning the tragedy of the fire at notre dame cathedral in paris  except for one glaring omission  prime minister narendra modi.the prime minister s twitter handle has absolutely no mention of modi s feelings and emotions as he watched the iconic structure burn  its spire collapse on monday evening. certainly  he should have sent a message to french president emmanuel macron and not only because india is entering into a defence relationship with france with the purchase of    rafale aircraft.most of the money has already been paid upfront. but no country wants a transactional relationship. the french are aghast beyond measure that their beloved notre dame has been damaged   they call it  the lady of paris    and friends are known to make their concern public when tragedy befalls the family.there s another reason why modi should have known better and commented on the notre dame fire tragedy. this is because he believes that over the last five years  he is the one who has brought india  front and centre  to the world s attention.also read  france unveils new statue commemorating role of indian soldiers in world war ijust watch the first few minutes of his interview with dd news and rajya sabha tv monday and you ll see  india has carved her place in the world in the last five years   modi said in the interview.  pehle hum darshak the  ab hum player hain  earlier we were in the audience  now we are players in the game    he said. and the world is acknowledging that fact  he added.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmodi went on  earlier  it was a bipolar world. now we are interconnected and dependent. we cannot afford to be isolated.certainly  modi s foreign policy learning curve has been incredibly steep in the last five years. when he became the prime minister  and sought to up end some of the rules of the game   speaking in hindi  telling foreign service probationers that strategic thinking is not about how to place your fork and knife   the media  including those from lutyens delhi  clapped.as he ends this term  the upending has also taken new forms that aren t particularly wholesome. for example  his embrace of russian president vladimir putin  who has been wily enough to award the pm last week russia s highest civilian honour  the order of st andrew the apostle.also read  france is working with india to come up with unique  jugaad  solutions to problemsnothing wrong with that  per se. awards are wonderful. we all love them and russia is an old and trusted friend. more recently  moscow has returned to the top of indian arms imports  after ceding that space to the us the last couple of years. putin probably realises that modi and us president donald trump don t particularly get along  so he s not averse to flattering the indian prime minister to persuade him to see that russian arms are the best.certainly  the americans aren t offering india an equivalent of the russian s     air defence system and may still impose sanctions. but modi s predecessors  since the end of the cold war   pv narasimha rao  atal bihari vajpayee  manmohan singh   learnt the art of intelligently managing both old ally and new friend  both russia and america  not dumping one for the other because they didn t like or get along with the leaders in those countries.with modi  it s different. he and trump don t really get along. tensions between india and the us have risen sharply in the last year  including those related to trade  but not just trade.putin sees that and reciprocates modi s hug even more warmly.meanwhile  putin and chinese president xi jinping are getting into a closer and closer embrace. let s not forget that india and china aren t the best of friends  despite the wuhan meeting  and the only country which can still persuade beijing to fall in line is the us  not russia.also read  from principles to pragmatism  five ways modi has changed india s foreign policyit s a bad world out there and india has survived these past several decades because of its ability to skilfully side step  evade and feint a pass or two. remember that after the balakot strikes and pakistan s counter strikes  the world pressed both india and pakistan to de escalate  de escalate  de escalate.pakistan was happy to do so because it had wing commander abhinandan varthaman in its custody. india s message of striking deeply into pakistan meant that modi had called rawalpindi s nuclear bluff. but both countries believe they won this particular battle. pakistan definitely believes the world will continue its engagement with it  if only to keep up the message of de escalation.in six weeks  india s general elections election will be over. whether or not modi comes back to power  india will have to pick up the threads with the world again.meanwhile  and more immediately  modi could send a message to france on the notre dame tragedy when he returns from his election campaign in odisha and elsewhere. the french may not care that much because they are in collective mourning. modi s message  in fact  would be a salve to all indians who believe it s important to reach out to a grieving friend.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




people say modi has charisma. churchill had it too   he lost a big election
text size  a  a intellectuals  sociologists and many in the media believe that elections  around the world  are fought on the mysterious and totally inexplicable notion called charisma. this time too  in the lok sabha elections  many journalists are comparing the  charisma quotient  of pm narendra modi and congress president rahul gandhi.there are people who believe that narendra modi has a particular kind of charisma and there are those who find him totally despicable. similarly  there are commentators who say that rahul gandhi s personality lacks appeal  while others vehemently argue that such observations are part of the propaganda promoted by the likes of arnab goswami.then of course  by and large  there is a consensus in the media that priyanka gandhi has a charm and genuine charismatic presence. they attribute it to the image and memories of her grandmother and former pm indira gandhi. ironically  indira gandhi was ridiculed as a  goongi gudiya  dumb doll    when she was chosen as congress  prime ministerial candidate in     .but in about five years  particularly after her daring fight with the old guard of the party  known as the syndicate  and her landslide victory in the       garibi hatao  election  she began to be described as a woman of courage and charisma   she became the  iron lady of india . indeed  the economist called her  empress of india  in their cover story after the      india pakistan bangladesh liberation war. that was charisma par excellence.now  even those who are hostile to indira gandhi  compare priyanka gandhi in positive terms to her grandmother. the so called nehru dynasty is considered charismatic. or else  nobody would have paid such exclusive attention to priyanka gandhi s children  aged    and     when they accompanied her to amethi. there is no other family in the country whose grandchildren are showered with so much media attention.also read  modi draws the worst  dumps the best of nehru   indira gandhi   and this might win him     the charismatictoday  we may hate to recognise it  but fact remains that adolf hitler was regarded by millions of germans and even many leading europeans as a leader with hypnotising charisma   even if it was dark. in america  automobile legend henry ford and aviation adventurer charles lindbergh were enamoured with hitler s charisma. they were also strongly anti semitic and perhaps that s why they supported the nazis.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowamong recent politicians in india  atal bihari vajpayee exuded that charismatic aura but his comrade in arms  lal krishna advani  could not. he was famous  but not charismatic. in the     s  jayaprakash narayan had that aura  although it was lost soon after the janata party s collapse.no other prime minister  post nehru  indira and rajiv gandhi could really claim that attribute. neither morarji desai  nor deve gowda  nor inder kumar gujral and chandra shekhar had that charm. that clearly proves that the post or power is not enough to get the charisma.in indian politics  there have been some  short term  charismatic figures who shone for a while but were forgotten soon. former prime minister vishwanath pratap singh was one of them. but he lost that appeal rather quickly. some like lalu prasad yadav and george fernandes had fleeting charisma that lasted only for some time.also read  atal bihari vajpayee  poet politician and one of india s most charismatic leadersthe phenomenonso  how does one decode the phenomenon of charisma  and in the current context  will that affect how people vote in the      lok sabha elections  will people vote for the bjp because of the media promoted charismatic image of narendra modi  would modi lose his appeal if he gets substantially less number of seats in this election   from     in      to say      in      winston churchill did not lose his charismatic appeal despite losing the election after leading the allies to a victory in world war ii. john kennedy continues to enjoy a charismatic image. so do fidel castro and che guevara  even now. just as mao still enjoys the divine status  his successor deng xiaoping cannot  despite his leadership that radically transformed china into a great power. no african leader can even come remotely close to nelson mandela.it is clear that wealth or fame  success or looks  access to power  international recognition or prestigious award cannot bestow a person with charisma. even this election will not be fought on the competitive charismatic character of modi or rahul gandhi.neither the biopic of modi   pm narendra modi starring vivek oberoi   nor the namo tv channel will build charisma or influence the electorate. perhaps  the election commission has saved the producer director as well as narendra modi by not letting the film released till the polls are over. if the film had flopped  it would have brought more ignominy.also read  from modi s eleven in      to only namo in       the modi fication of bjp is now completea charismatic leader or media s image management can perhaps attract crowds  but that does not guarantee electoral success. elections are lost and won on very mundane issues like price rise or communal divide  on caste or language  on corruption scandals or misdemeanours.but those who go for a propaganda overkill and try to bulldoze the campaign  neglecting the major burning issues  will realise belatedly that the investment in image management was not at all worth the results. for them the d day of reckoning is not far off   it s    may.the author is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




gandhi valued sanitation more than independence. modi s swachh bharat is fulfilling his dream
text size  a  a if there has been one pet scheme of the narendra modi government  it is undoubtedly the world s largest sanitation programme   the swachh bharat mission. right from the time narendra modi was the chief minister of gujarat to his independence day speeches from the red fort as the prime minister  modi has made sanitation a priority issue for both the government and the citizens for the first time.launched on   october       as a tribute to mahatma gandhi  the swachh bharat mission  sbm  seeks to make india completely open defecation free  odf  by october        the    th birth anniversary of gandhi. sanitation is a state subject and the central government can create awareness  provide incentives and frame guidelines that the states need to vigorously follow up on.as per the central government s guidelines  an odf declaration is made when there is  no visible faeces found in the environment village  and  every household  as well as public community institutions  use safe technology  to dispose of faecal material.  safe  here would mean non contamination of surface soil as well as surface and groundwater  and non exposure of excreta to flies leading to spread of diseases  infection and odour.also read      rural households have access to toilets     .   use them  says surveygiven the broad and largely vague definition and the scale of operation  this seemed like an impossible challenge in      when modi took over. according to unicef  when the sbm was launched in       there were     million rural and about    million urban households in india that did not have a sanitary toilet. a staggering     million  accounting for    per cent globally  people defecated in the open.today  over nine crore toilets have been built across rural india under this mission. more than  .  lakh villages and     districts have been declared odf  along with    odf states and union territories.the national annual rural sanitation survey  narss          was conducted by an independent verification agency  iva  between november      and february       covering        households in       villages across india s states. the results were presented to an expert working group that had representatives of the world bank  unicef  bill and melinda gates foundation and so on. the survey found that the sbm grameen had succeeded in ensuring   .  per cent of households in rural india have access to a toilet. it also confirmed the odf status of   .  per cent of the villages that had already been declared so. from a sanitation coverage of   .  per cent in       the surge to   .   per cent in     indicates a phenomenal increase.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowway back in       an interim assessment of the swachh bharat mission by the unicef indicated that on an average  households in odf villages accrued cumulative benefits of rs        per year. these benefits came from savings on medical costs that would have been incurred due to sickness caused by the filth and open defecation. it also factored in the value of lives saved and the reduction of time lost due to sickness and finding a suitable place to defecate.especially in children  the scourge of open defecation led to contamination of food and drinking water  causing the spread of diarrhoea  malnutrition and childhood stunting   something that cost india  .  per cent of its gdp  as per a world bank estimate.households with toilets saw its property value increase too at an average of rs       .also read  menstrual hygiene must be made part of swachh bharat   beti bachao  beti padhaothe world health organization  who  claims that once completed in october       the sbm grameen would help avert more than          deaths  caused mainly by diarrhoea and protein energy malnutrition. before       the who reported     million annual cases of diarrhoea and other illnesses in rural india. this figure has been steadily falling  with more than    million cases being avoided.no wonder unicef s executive director henrietta fore heaped praise on prime minister modi in october      for investing his  political time and efforts  on issues that often get sidelined  like health and sanitation.  if you invest a dollar in sanitation solutions  the benefit will be four dollars in terms of health cost prevention  the  reduction in  number of visits you go to a doctor and in the medicines that you don t have to buy   she said.given the sensitive nature of the subject  it was difficult to gather too many details from  beneficiaries . however  a few voices spoke up about how the scheme had changed their lives for the better.sampath kumar from vatavagar village in coimbatore mentions that there has been a tremendous spurt in the construction of toilets since the launch of sbm.  several others in my village and i got an allowance of rs        to construct quality toilets in our houses. several awareness campaigns too were launched. now  five villages in our block have been declared odf   he said.mansa ben from gujarat s patan would dread the idea of walking long distances for her daily ablutions. fearing the safety of her young daughter  she would accompany her as well. people kept wandering around in the fields and to  quickly finish our chore before getting noticed  was a huge dent to their dignity. a pucca toilet in their home now at a cost of rs        has made their lives much more comfortable and dignified.arti gautam who works in a school in sikkim notes with concern how the absence of toilets in their schools led many students to defecate in the open  causing frequent sickness.  importantly many girl students started dropping out of school. now  under swachh bharat  a toilet has been constructed in our school. and suddenly  the girls who had dropped out are coming back. it has also led to greater attendance levels among all students and fewer cases of diarrhoea   she adds.earlier this year  prime minister modi gave away the swachh shakti awards to a dozen women sarpanches  who had motivated their villages to achieve     per cent sanitation. regular swachh rankings have created healthy competition among states  cities and districts. but  while the government can allocate funds and prime minister modi can lead the optics of the campaign by wielding a broom or nominating eminent people to spread the message  the success of the sbm can only come from public participation and complete behavioural transformation. despite a toilet being there  driven by old habit  many people continue to use the fields.in some cases  people availed the rs        given to them under the sbm to build a toilet to marry off their daughters. a sample study in madhya pradesh showed that low toilet usage was also linked to caste disadvantages. the balai caste  for instance  were found to be more disadvantaged both in terms of using toilets and accessibility to communication efforts undertaken to induce behavioural change.also read  swachh bharat has made little difference  govt should factor in criticismbut the ingenious ways that people seem to have devised to circumvent this problem have been heartening. even young  inspired children like yashraj from madhya pradesh s baigram village formed a  vaanar sena  with his friends to stop the open defecation habit.  we got up at   am and set out to different parts of our village. whenever we saw people easing themselves in the open  we would start blowing horns or whistles and throw away their water mugs. this would shame many people who would run away  abusing us. slowly  they have started using the constructed toilets   beamed yashraj.noting this behavioural change  val curtis  director of the london school of hygiene and tropical medicine s environmental health group who has worked on the sbm mentioned   it s the biggest  most successful behaviour change campaign in the world every time i go there  i feel like i can t sit down for weeks after because i m excited about what they re doing. it s incredible. the dream of the father of the nation was total sanitation for all.  sanitation is more important than independence   gandhi had said. there could be no better tribute to him than the realisation of his dream by the time we commemorate his    th birth anniversary.this is the ninth part of a series on the author s conversations with beneficiaries of schemes launched by the narendra modi government. read the others here.the author is a writer historian political analyst and a senior fellow at the nehru memorial museum and library  with an upcoming biography of savarkarsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




research shows it makes sense for narendra modi   bjp to focus on national security in     
text size  a  a both the bjp and the congress  the two largest national parties in india  have presented manifestos that are close to their ideological positions. in doing so  they have established the political framework for the      lok sabha elections.while the congress party has focused on the economic concerns of ordinary indians and minority rights  the bjp s focus is more on national security  cultural ethos and big infrastructural projects.so  which ideological position are voters likely to favour in this election nearly all pre poll surveys released in the last few weeks indicate that voters prioritise economic concerns over other subjects when asked about the most important issue for them while voting. for example  in an open ended question to identify the most significant electoral issue  the respondents in the lokniti csds pre poll survey overwhelmingly pointed to economic issues such as unemployment  development and price rise over national security concerns  see table   .table    economic concerns remain important for indian voters  in   these economic issues have received greater weight in the congress party s manifestos  yet respondents in the pre poll surveys are more likely to vote for the bjp than the congress.most pollsters are betting on the return of bjp led nda to power. the emerging consensus is that balakot has heightened nationalistic sentiments among indian voters and has given a significant bump in prime minister modi s popularity. the bjp is reaping the dividends of these two factors.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhat explains this puzzling behaviour of indian voters  and why is the bjp using national security as its main campaign plank also read  after balakot  future indian pms will have to follow the modi standard on terror responsethe two types of issuespolitical scientists distinguish between two types of issues   valence issues and positional issues. on valence issues  a vast majority of voters have similar views. in other words  all citizens would like development  reduction of poverty  fight against corruption and an improvement in the conditions of rural  and even urban  india.voters tend to have common goals on such issues and parties compete on effectively fulfilling them. satisfactory handling of valence issues gives incumbents an advantage  while mismanagement gives challengers a short term opportunity to mobilise voters on these issues. corruption became a mobilisational plank for the bjp in     .on positional issues  political parties usually have divergent views and they try to convince voters about their respective positions. positional issues include core ideological subjects  such as the bjp s stand to do away with article     of the indian constitution that accords special status to the state of jammu and kashmir or the congress  position on secularism.it is important to note that national security in itself is a valence issue  but how a party chooses to approach it is a positional issue. the bjp s ideological position  for instance  drives its stance on hard nationalism.what voters prioritiseindian voters  like their counterparts across the globe  tend to prioritise valence issues when asked about the most important issue while voting. the evidence from previous national election study  nes  surveys bears testimony to this fact. in the      and      nes  a plurality of voters mentioned valence issues such as corruption  price rise  employment  and bijli sadak paani  electricity  roads  and water  as their most important concerns.however  as our fieldwork in rural uttar pradesh suggests  these encompassing categories may be capturing a very diverse worldview. for instance  a farmer and a middle class person have fairly different grievances when they complain about price rise.the combination of these two pieces of evidence offers a very crucial insight about indian politics  indian voters are unable to articulate their sectional priorities and respond in very generic terms.the effects of this have been far reaching in terms of electoral mobilisation and prioritising issues in campaign speeches.sectional mobilisation of class and occupational groups during elections is rare  e.g.  farmers do not participate in the electoral process as an occupational group  and political campaigns in india tend to get framed around large encompassing categories of  vikaas   development    mehengai   price rise    naukari   jobs  and  bhrastachar   corruption .most politicians  at least in their rhetoric  emphasise on goals that are common to all political parties on these issues. during our fieldwork  we often hear people say   aap hi bataiye kisko vote dein  sab ek hi hai   you suggest whom to vote  all politicians speak the same language . also read  from modi s eleven in      to only namo in       the modi fication of bjp is now completeregular issues vs a specific issuenonetheless  elections in india and elsewhere  most often  have a subterranean context of a positional issue. in the aftermath of pulwama and balakot  hard stance on the question of national security has become salient  and the bjp has gone all out to make this issue its main campaign plank. the bjp  like most right wing parties  has a natural advantage over the national security plank   the party owns the issue.how does the theory of issue ownership help in understanding the puzzling behaviour of indian voters in the run up to the      lok sabha elections issue ownership suggests that voters associate a particular issue with a specific party  which is considered more competent to deal with it. thus  political parties during the election campaign make an effort to shift the focus towards the issues that they  own.  ownership of an issue essentially depends on the party s ideological position and its social support base.the choices made by the party in adopting a particular position on an issue is critical for building its  reputation  on the handling of that issue. the path dependency of these choices either enhances or restricts the party s ability to own an issue. the congress party in post indira gandhi years gave away its position to the bjp on the national security question.also read  modi s bjp is confident of winning      because of the echo chamber it has createdbalakot   modi s popularitythe pre poll surveys conducted by lokniti csds and other agencies point to the unambiguous presence of heightened national security concerns while determining voters  responses on most indicators.in less than a year  there seems to be a turnaround for the bjp. the preference for narendra modi as india s next prime minister has increased by nine percentage points  and now more respondents are inclined to vote for the bjp  finds the lokniti csds pre poll survey.post balakot  national security has become the lens through which voters are viewing the performance of the nda government and rating it more favourably than in the past  even on economy related issues  see figure   . the number of respondents who believe that the current economic situation of the country is good has also gone up.figure    the effect of nationalism lens on economic concerns  in   most surveys were conducted in mid march  at a time when nationalist sentiments would have been at their highest  and that s why it s no surprise that pollsters are estimating a decisive lead for the bjp led nda. we will find out on    may if national security concerns subsided as the election progressed or provided momentum to modi s campaign.rahul verma is fellow at the centre for policy research  delhi. pranav gupta is a phd student in political science at the university of california at berkeley  us.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




from modi s eleven in      to only namo in       the modi fication of bjp is now complete
text size  a  a the modi fication of the bjp is complete and nothing demonstrates this better than the cover of the party s      poll manifesto that was released monday.prime minister narendra modi stands confidently on the cover  his glasses so paper thin that you can look directly into his eyes.  sankalpit bharat  sashakt bharat   the cover page reads   decisive india  strong india. look inside  and the contents reflect the shift away from creating jobs  fixing the unemployment crisis and putting the economy on a growth path to issues of national security. the surgical strikes of      and the balakot strikes of february       both inside pakistan  are briefly mentioned but their significance is clear.also read  advani  joshi were missing from bjp manifesto release event because they weren t invitednow contrast the      manifesto with the      poll manifesto when the modi government was swept into power on the back of the anti corruption movement launched by anna hazare and which pretty much demolished the congress party.the      cover features all the bjp s biggest leaders. from atal bihari vajpayee to l.k. advani to murli manohar joshi and rajnath singh to younger leaders like arun jaitley  sushma swaraj and vasundhara raje.modi still held front and centre  he had the biggest photo on the cover.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbut he is one of many  the captain of the bjp eleven  supported in his effort to dislodge the manmohan singh government by a full team of heavyweights. in       there is only one captain and his name is narendrabhai damodardas modi.the pretence of having l.k. advani involved in even the smallest way in the bjp manifesto was formally dropped. there was no telephone call  no courtesy call  nothing  asking him to come to the manifesto launch.the six time mp from gandhinagar and bjp founder gave way to party president amit shah weeks ago  who is now standing from the seat. it seems shah did go to meet advani later last evening at      pm  much after the event.perhaps advani s last blog on how the bjp was never in favour of demonising the political opposition and calling them  anti national  did the trick of erasing him altogether from modi s pantheon. even past president murli manohar joshi was not invited.also read  unlike vajpayee   advani  gen next bjp leaders groomed by modi shah don t look promisingcertainly  the old order must give way to the new  and advani at    has to cede poll position. but what of external affairs minister sushma swaraj no wonder she has said she will not contest the      election. having been more or less marginalised from decision making in india s foreign policy  in favour of national security adviser ajit doval  swaraj kept her pride and turned to do the next best thing  working hard with nris and indians abroad  so that she became lovingly known as  aunty sushma .vasundhara raje and shivraj singh chouhan  former chief ministers of rajasthan and madhya pradesh  didn t find their hoary places on the cover because they lost in their states. but what about home minister and head of the manifesto committee rajnath singh as the bjp goes into the      polls  one man leads the army. everyone else is a lieutenant  far diminished in stature in comparison to modi. no wonder bjp candidates fighting this election  including those close to the rss  are obliterated.votes  at least in the hindi heartland  are coming in modi s name  not in the names of the candidates. in bisada village in western uttar pradesh  where the first lynching of a muslim man  mohammed akhlaq  in the name of the sacred cow took place in       voters are angry about sitting bjp mp mahesh sharma   he has done no work    but remain exultant about modi.significantly  and despite everything  there s no modi wave. certainly  the bjp will fight tooth and nail for every seat  but the fight is taking place in modi s name. the candidate is irrelevant  he or she doesn t matter.also read  is bjp manifesto strong enough to make voters bring back narendra modi in may      ujjwala yojana gas cylinders are identified with modi  and this is whom women are likely to vote for. surgical strikes and giving pakistan a good bashing appeals to the indian machismo culture  modi is responsible for the  ghus ghus ke maarenge  slogan.even former police commissioner  outgoing junior hrd minister satyapal singh  fighting from baghpat in western uttar pradesh  who considers himself a  man of science  told me that he  cannot comment  on the pm s remarks about surgeries in ancient india  notably how ganesha got an elephant s head.interestingly  the modi machine is being challenged in        perhaps this is the most important story of this election. despite their differences and ego clashes and unhealthy past histories  the value of the  mahagathbandhan  between mayawati of the bsp  akhilesh yadav of the samajwadi party and ajit singh of the rld  at least in uttar pradesh  is that it offers the voter an alternative to modi and the bjp.will the voter bite  that s another debate. for the time being  modi s juggernaut has challengers. if india has been described as a land of million mutinies  it may be that some take place in these elections.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




this election  a lot of people are rooting for a weak narendra modi
text size  a  a if in      india wanted a strong leader  in      it needs a weak one. this lok sabha election  many are rooting for a weak narendra modi   the median between a strong modi and a rag tag coalition that collapses like a pack of cards.should we have a rag tag third front  such a government will likely not last five years. the instability will make modi say  look  i told you so. modi could then be back with more than     seats.we could witness a similar fate if the congress forms the government with just     seats or so. the bharatiya janata party  bjp  won t let such a government work. they ll be trying to bring it down every parliament session. policy paralysis will be back  emboldening cries for a strongman to take over once again.also read  what will narendra modi do if he is not pm in      should the bjp win a clear majority once again  it will make modi stronger than he was in     . if modi gets a simple majority even after failing terribly in delivering on the party s main promise   economic prosperity   he will feel like he can get away with anything.expect more disastrous unilateral governance  be it tughlaqi farmans like demonetisation or bids to steal the people s mandate in states and destroying independent institutions. he will think nothing of unleashing social unrest  from assam and bengal to kashmir and kerala. as an economic turnaround will elude us  a strong modi could only become more hindutva and more jingoistic.there is a mean point between the two extremes above  a weak modi.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe desire for a weak modi is the strongest among the sort of business people who dare not open their mouths to publicly criticise dear leader. sotto voce  they build their castles in the air   a weak modi won t be such a bad thing   they say   if he gets more than      he won t even listen to his people .it is a strange thing  to wish that one s own country may have a weak prime minister. you d think one would curse enemies with such a thing. yet in the last five years  many have seen the pitfalls of a strong leader.for all her achievements  indira gandhi is best remembered for the emergency today. and  rajiv gandhi for wasting away the humungous four fifth majority he won. strong leaders tend to develop a god complex. they think they can get away with anything  now that they have the mandate of the people.power corrupts  and absolute power corrupts absolutely. this election  india needs a weak leader who s dependent enough on a group of regional allies so that he has to constantly watch his back. such a leader would be on his toes all the time  knowing he has to avoid extremes.also read  modi s      mantra  forget achhe din  fear terror  pakistan  muslima weak leader will know he can t pretend farmers don t exist or fudge economic data with a straight face. a weak leader would know he  or she  can t choose their time to barely condemn communal violence. a weak leader will find it untenable to openly declare the ambition of making india a one party state because the allies will say bye bye and withdraw support.in       india elected a  bahubali   not a  chowkidar . people who appoint a  chowkidar  don t fear him in their sleep. in       india needs a  chowkidar  who s afraid of them. a  chowkidar  who knows he can get fired any moment for messing it up.five years is too long a time to give any leader a carte blanche to do whatever s he wants with  .  billion people. our lives can t be subjected to the whims and fancies of one man just because we voted for him. the institutions that keep him in check matter  or at least they should. the supreme court  the rajya sabha  the election commission  the lokpal  and so on.also read  liberals accusing modi of creating a fear complex in      are guilty of doing the samenext time  when the ruling party makes the cbi its political weapon  there s got to be an unhappy ally who gets up and says this is not on. next time  when a big business wants to say you are hurting us too much and hampering our job creation ability for us to create jobs  some ally has to play messenger.of course  many of these allies will cut a deal for the lucrative ministries  a no compete clause in the states  perhaps something like the stuff written in yeddyurappa s diaries. and then  there ll be the cbi cases. but at least  they won t be cowed down the way the bjp s own leaders were for five years. at least  there will be more people willing to speak with courage.a weak leader is a strong idea.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




what s common between  sholay    how we see pm modi  family ties
text size  a  a there is something to be said about the appeal prime minister narendra modi enjoys among indians. it goes beyond what he has delivered or not delivered in the last five years. to understand it in the election season  one must look into the traditional social signalling that works in indian politics.recently  a hoarding of an aspiring mla in haryana s sonipat read   neta nahin beta   not a leader  but your son . when i asked my driver if it wasn t more important to be a leader  he replied   madam woh ek namrata hoti hai   implying that it s considered too arrogant to project yourself as a leader. to say you are more of a son than a leader is also a way to make an appeal to the social rather than the political impulse of democracy.more importantly  it is an appeal to emotions of familial relationships that indian politicians tap into and how it helps them in perception management.also read  whether or not modi remains pm in       a new political generation will slowly eclipse the oldahead of the lok sabha elections  even the fiercest supporters of the prime minister in gujarat  as elsewhere  would admit today that the modi sheen has faded  the joblessness and farm distress have somewhat diffused the spell of     . and yet few would deny his basic legitimacy  even if they doubt his efficacy.how are the gaps filled  rationalised  justified by those who believe him the conversation about the  beta vs neta  hoarding took me back to two distinct instances about narendra modi over the past year and the public imagination he occupies in gujarat.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowwhile gujarat may no more be central to this calculation  it is the state that formed the persona  andcontinues to provide important lessons on how this political myth continues to be sustained.the film sholay comes to mind.some days ago  when i was visiting an old couple in ahmedabad  i was reminded of the iconic scene from sholay where jay  played by amitabh bachchan  defended every single fault of veeru  dharmendra  while presenting him as a match before his lady love s grandmother. my friend was defending modi the same way   smartly qualifying the gap between intentions and results  between his charisma and the inefficient system he is working with.  narendrabhai ne saara loko malta nathi  narendrabhai does not get good enough people to work with    she said as she released herself from the burden of assessment.similarly  veeru drinks  courts other women and gambles. but he is still the  most suitable  boy. i am quoting this comparison to point out how fallibility finds containment in strong allegiances. while ideology may be one of the reasons  it is not the only reason for the support modi enjoys.also read  modi or rahul gandhi  a guide on how to choose whom to vote forto people outside gujarat  this may seem to be yet another blind fan moment  but our political understanding would be poorer if we fail to understand that these are filial networks working alongside democracy.take a look at another interaction in gujarat.  narendrabhai no kaagal aavyo chhe   the owner of a reputed fabric store in ahmedabad said. he was referring to his father s birthday and how every year  without fail  the father is wished by narendra modi. i could have easily told myself this was another blind worshipper and walked away. instead  i stopped for a moment to think. in the divided terrain between those who worship modi to the extent that they overlook everything and those who see the confirmation of their worst fears  dialogue may seem far fetched but it is still desirable. a granular differentiation of voices and locations may diffuse homogenisation  and in turn humanise the discourse somewhat.what the store owner said about modi showed that in the minds of some  or many    narendrabhai  is like a vadheel  or an elderly  a buzurg. just as elders are forgiven for the sacrifices they have made in the past  so has modi in the minds of his followers in gujarat. he has denied himself the pleasures of family life  the excesses of pleasure that money brings  and he is  therefore  the wise old man  who also has the dynamism to reach out to the young. the belief is that the family  and hence the nation  is in safe hands of the buzurg.also read  here s why modi gets away with his gaffes  while rahul gandhi gets called pappuit is in this social realm in gujarat  rather than the polemic political debates in tv studios  that modi continues to have legitimacy and thrive. and this requires reflection. it is in this social sphere of indian democracy that leaders are given familial epithets  and the audit is not conducted on the basis of delivery of justice  but the intensity of affiliation. this applies to amma  j. jayalalithaa   didi  mamata banerjee   behenji or bua  mayawati  and bhaiyya  rahul gandhi  and the social kinships that indian citizens forge on their political leaders.this shapes the quality of leadership and policy making as well.rita kothari is a professor of english at ashoka university.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




how rss pressure forced pro business modi to turn bjp s      ship towards populism
text size  a  a addressing the global business elite at the      world economic forum in davos  switzerland  indian prime minister narendra modi placed india firmly in the camp of globalization and free trade. echoing a speech delivered by chinese president xi jinping at the same forum a year earlier  modi suggested that india could be a standard bearer for globalization and provide global leadership for trade liberalization. touting the  radical liberalization  of the country s foreign direct investment  fdi  regulations  modi had boasted in      that india was  the most open economy in the world for fdi. but not all members of the sangh parivar the hindu nationalist rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss  and its affiliate organizations  of which modi s bharatiya janata party  bjp  is one shared the prime minister s enthusiasm for foreign investment. the swadeshi jagaran manch  sjm   an economic affiliate of the historically protectionist rss  vehemently opposed liberal fdi norms  arguing that  fdi has done more bad than good to the economy.  the sangh s protectionist reputation notwithstanding  the leadership of the rss  has been content to let multiple points of view coexist  preferring to mediate the policy differences among the bjp and the rss s economic affiliates on a case by case basis.the bjp started as a political party with autarkic instincts  supporting foreign investment only in high tech sectors  a stance illustrated by the pithy slogan  computer chips but not potato chips.  over time  particularly during the tenure of former prime minister atal bihari vajpayee  the party began to favor liberal economic polices best exemplified by its decision to abandon a long standing ideological totem to propose foreign investment in retail. the selection of the business friendly modi  suggested that the bjp was evolving into a more conventionally center right political party  and that the party was moving away from the statist and autarkic proclivities of the sangh.the rss s own economic ideology  which has often been caricatured as  communism plus cow   has also evolved. while the rss has softened its once implacable opposition to globalization and economic liberalization  its current economic philosophy is best summed up as populism with indian characteristics.also read  the so called non political rss is setting the agenda for      electionsbut political exigencies  and pressure from the sangh has helped push the bjp government s economic policies in a more populist direction  especially in the last two years of its tenure. the increased convergence between the sangh s economic populism and the government s own policies led the bjp to dilute  deemphasize  or even abandon some of its more market friendly campaign promises.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowstill  the influence of the sangh on the bjp is not unidirectional. in many cases  sangh affiliates certainly do shape government policy. in other instances  the bjp government itself has influenced the thinking of its fellow travelers within the sangh  bringing them closer to its point of view  irrespective of the direction in which this causality appears to run  there has been a noticeable policy convergence between the bjp and the sangh on many economic matters. this convergence is not only shaping the bjp s      election campaign  but it will also likely define a putative second term for the bjp if the party returns to power.bjp s economic evolutionthe evolution of the rss s economic philosophy was mirrored by its political affiliate  the bjp. for much of the post liberalization era  the bjp s swadeshi wing was more prominent  much like the rss  the bjp also supported decentralized production and an economic policy that tilts the playing field toward family owned small businesses.the bjp s swadeshi wing was gradually sidelined during the tenure of previous bjp prime minister vajpayee  much to the dismay of some within the sangh parivar  the vajpayee government opened up sectors such as insurance and media to foreign investment and privatized state owned enterprises. expressing his ire   bharatiya mazdoor sangh s dattopant  thengadi called yashwant sinha  who was then serving as finance minister  a  criminal  and labeled his policies  anti national. when serving in an opposition role  however  the bjp has opportunistically decried further economic liberalization such as when it objected to the congress party s proposed opening of the retail sector to foreign investment. the dynamic shifted once more with the bjp s decision to choose the business friendly modi as its candidate for prime minister  which further marginalized the party s swadeshi wing.also read  the  bahujan unity  model is the only way to counter the bjp rss at national levelmore recently  as the      general election has approached  political expediency as well as pressure from the sangh have shifted the government s policies in a more populist direction in some cases.over the past year  the rss has leveraged india s changing political context to nudge the bjp government in a more economically populist direction  although these efforts have not been unambiguously successful. in many cases  government policy bears the rss s imprint  but these positions have not always been incorporated into the final drafts of legislation or fully implemented. furthermore  this pattern of influence on economic thinking runs both ways  just as the rss and sangh affiliates have helped shape government policy  the bjp too has exerted influence on its sangh colleagues. while the causal connections are messy and circular there is no doubt that the rss has found a seat at the policy high table for the last five years.a prominent recent instance of this pattern is the nomination of the sjm s s. gurumurthy as a director on the central board of the reserve bank of india  rbi . the rbi board has a limited role in policy decisions and has traditionally served as an advisory body. however  gurumurthy lobbied the rbi to change regulations that he perceived were choking the flow of credit to small and medium enterprises.the sjm and other rss economic affiliates have also supported the repatriation of rbi  excess reserves  to the government  resources that could presumably be used to fund populist welfare measures in the run up to the      election. the sjm noted in its newsletter that  only  the  central government owns the right over these reserves and profits of the rbi.  the ensuing controversy led rbi governor urjit patel to quit his position months before the end of his term  further damaging the government s reformist credentials. among the first decisions of the new governor  shaktikanta das  was to allow regulatory forbearance on the restructuring of the overdue loans of small and medium enterprises a marked reversal of the previous rbi governor s policy against the restructuring of loans.the indian government has pursued more populist economic policies on other fronts as well. a month after modi s celebrated      davos speech  union finance minister arun jaitley announced in his budget speech a  calibrated departure from the underling policy  of reducing customs duty of the  last two decades.  in response to the depreciation of the indian rupee  caused largely by a bout of financial market volatility that has increased investors  risk aversion toward emerging markets  the government further selectively increased import duties  ostensibly to reduce the trade deficit also read  happy that budget has taken our concerns into account  rss affiliatesmore recently  the proposed tightening of norms a policy that was met with approbation from the sjm for e commerce retailers  which hampers the operations of amazon and flipkart  flies in the face of the prime minister s promise of a  red carpet  for foreign investors. the increased assertiveness of the sangh parivar also caused the government to abandon the prime minister s campaign claim that  the government has no business being in business   instantiated most recently by the scrapped plans to privatize perennially loss making air india.notwithstanding the indian finance minister s repeated commitments to fiscal prudence  and in the face of flagging revenues from the newly introduced gst  the modi government has also proposed an expensive expansion of the welfare state. ayushman bharat  better known as modicare  seeks to provide health insurance of         rupees  approximately        or more than three and a half times india s per capita gdp  to the poorest half of indian citizens. similarly  in a decision that reflects skepticism over the efficacy of farm loan waivers from quarters within the sangh  the modi government announced an income support scheme for farmers in the      budget to ameliorate the sagging fortunes of the agriculture sector much to the chagrin of the party s libertarian minded supporters  the bjp s      manifesto and campaign platform will likely center on an expansion of public spending and a deemphasis on business friendly appeals. the bjp s      campaign was centered on the promise to bring acche din  better days  to the indian economy  the next campaign is poised to be more preoccupied with promises of expanding the welfare state and improving the efficacy of welfare delivery.the rss  for its part  appears content with the policy direction the modi government has taken  and this shift could not have come at a better time  the rss cadres are an important source of help for powering the bjp s formidable election machine. a satisfied  energized cadre will provide a much needed lift to the ruling party s reelection prospects.gautam mehta is a recent graduate of the johns hopkins school of advanced international studies  sais . he helped write a book on the sangh parivar  co authored by walter k. andersen and shridhar d. damle  called the rss  a view to the inside  penguin random house india       .this is an edited excerpt from the essay  hindu nationalism and the bjp s economic record  first published by carnegie endowment for international peace as part of its report titled  the bjp in power  indian democracy and religious nationalism .subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




liberals accusing modi of creating a fear complex in      are guilty of doing the same
text size  a  a over     filmmakers  writers and artistes are staging yet another entreaty to oust the bjp in the      elections. if there is one thing appreciable about the artistes  writers and filmmakers who call themselves  independent    progressive  and  liberal   it is the alacrity and consistency with which they step up before any major election to provide intellectual horsepower to those they support. if you are openly naming and shaming a legitimate political party  how can you claim to be  neutral  this pattern has become so excruciatingly boring and predictable that common indians look at them disdainfully. the misguided sense of self importance that they know what is good for the country and that the unwashed  unlettered millions need their guidance is what adds to their growing irrelevance in india today. no one grudges their fundamental and democratic right to issue such appeals. but it is natural that those who do not subscribe to this propaganda want to counter it.also read  modi s      mantra  forget achhe din  fear terror  pakistan  muslimintolerant india slogansince the time prime minister narendra modi assumed office in may       several people who were entrenched in the system under erstwhile regimes suddenly fell out of favour. and since then  their campaign has been relentless.from december       a ceaseless blitzkrieg was carried out when the terrible incidents of attacks on churches and rape of a nun surfaced just before the delhi state elections. the shrill rhetoric of christians being persecuted in india under  fascist  modi had international ramifications  drawing the attention of foreign media and even former us president barack obama. the special investigation teams that probed these church attacks found that the reasons ranged from drunken ribaldry of miscreants to electric short circuits. the rape was committed by a bangladeshi national.but by then the lie had been repeated so many times that the smokescreen of  unsafe india  was fully reinforced. not a squeak of an apology came from any self righteous  intellectual  or the media that spread this fake news that tarnished the country s image.and then they moved to the slogan that india had turned  intolerant . indignant artists and writers returned their awards. wives of actors felt scared for their kids growing up here and wished to migrate.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe zeal with which narratives are quickly constructed with a pliable media is truly a case study.sources in the sahitya akademi  which bore the brunt of the campaign  reveal that some writers had not even bothered sending back their award plaques  let alone the prize money. but they had got their    minutes of fame in the national media   returning their awards caused more sensation than getting it in the first place.an analysis of the national crime records bureau  ncrb  s data reveals that under the upa  crimes against dalits rose by   .  per cent   from        cases in      to        cases in     . this meant there was almost one crime every    minutes throughout its tenure. moreover  five dalit women were raped on an average every day in     . are we to conclude these were at the behest of sonia gandhi or manmohan singh in fact  the ncrb data puts      as the worst year in terms of crimes against dalit women  scs and sts as they rose by    per cent     per cent and    per cent  respectively from the previous year. taking the base year as       when crimes against dalits rose by   .  per cent as compared to the previous year  the figures for crimes against women  scs and sts under the nda fell by   per cent     per cent and   per cent  respectively in     .the latest      ncrb report suggests that growth in crimes against women and sc sts is well under   per cent.so  what is the data source for all the screaming from the rooftops that the marginalised communities are increasingly being targeted  do these  intellectuals  have their own ncrb  or  is it just the way they  feel  or is it the result of some fake media reportage as seen in the church case  can the narrative of an entire nation be set by a bunch of people sitting fearfully in their air conditioned homes also read  modi is not a loved pm  he is a feared pm  says madhya pradesh chief minister kamal nathcow vigilantismif there has been any issue that has received immense media scrutiny  and rightly so  it is undoubtedly cow vigilantism and related violence. added to this  the idiocy of several ministers garlanding or getting themselves photographed with those accused of lynching makes it a justified case for severe condemnation.however  one must also acknowledge that the issue of cow slaughter is an extremely sensitive one in india and not something that began on    may     . the rumours of beef lard in the cartridges were one of the many reasons for the country rising in revolt in     . history is replete with numerous cases of hindu muslim riots that the british governments had to deal with on this very issue.the cow protection movement was championed by leaders like mahatma gandhi who wrote in young india on   june      that  no one who does not believe in cow protection can possibly be a hindu. cow worship means to me the worship of innocence . gandhian vinoba bhave went on fasts unto death to protect the cow from the butcher s knife.similar sentiments attached to animals are found in several countries. being man s best friend  dog meat is banned in countries like germany  the us and in parts of australia. the us has also banned horse meat on similar compassionate grounds.close to two dozen states  many during the congress regimes  passed laws forbidding cow slaughter. but it is one thing to pass a law and another to implement them on ground.regular cases of cattle thefts get reported across rural india  where cows are the backbone of the agrarian economy. the resultant social unrest and the pathetic absence of effective policing to maintain law and order make this a potpourri for disaster. while no civilised society should condone lynching of any form  the intense visibility that these attacks have been attracting since      is for obvious political gains. extrapolating a few incidents in a country of  .  billion and calling india  lynchistan  is disingenuous and dangerous.at the same time  in these five years  cow activists have been brutally killed too   notable among them is the murder of prashanth poojary in karnataka s moodabidri. but such cases are hardly reported by mainstream media.similarly  during the last five years  cases of violence by muslim mobs against dalits have not made it to the headlines  nor have they led to an outrage by appeal activists.also read  unlike nehru  narendra modi has no army of intellectual elite and the rss is to blameartistes under threat the  appeals  also allege that artistes and musicians who oppose the narendra modi government have been hounded. public memory is short. else  we would not have forgotten that celebrated poet lyricist majrooh sultanpuri spent two years in jail in      for an  anti establishment  poem that called former prime minister jawaharlal nehru hitler s prot g .actor utpal dutt was arrested in      for an article that was labelled seditious. several of his plays were banned during the emergency. congress chief minister of west bengal at the time siddhartha sankar ray had famously commented   he would politically confront the issue .singer kishore kumar was blacklisted from the all india radio and his songs were banned on air and doordarshan after he refused to sing for a congress government programme.incidents of books and films being banned by  progressive  and  secular  governments since      are enough to fill a museum wall. a few films that were banned or faced censor board ire include aandhi  kissa kursi ka  nasbandi  amu  sins  rajneeti  hazaaron khwaishein aisi and tango charlie.just a fraction of the books that our  liberals  banned include nehru  a political biography  who killed gandhi   dwikhandito  nine hours to rama  understanding islam through hadis  ayesha  himalayan blunder  the da vinci code  the moor s last sigh and the satanic verses. sweeping notifications were imposed for bans on the import of books and reading material in            and     .writers and activists like salman rushdie  v.s. naipaul  taslima nasreen  sanal edamaruku  and t.j. joseph have been hounded. shamefully  india became the first country to ban satanic verses even before ayatollah khomeini s totalitarian regime did.threat to free speechin more recent times  the upa s draconian section   a curbed freedom of expression on the internet. someone tweeting against karti chidambaram could just be picked up and jailed. content screening regulations were discussed with google  microsoft  yahoo and facebook by then union minister kapil sibal.in congress ruled karnataka  arrests were made in      in koppala for posting  derogatory  content against tipu sultan and for  criticising  siddaramaiah  while two journalists were arrested for defaming legislators. in samajwadi ruled uttar pradesh in       mobs gathered allegedly demanding the head of kamlesh tiwari for his comments against the prophet. the ripple effect resulting in the malda violence was believed to be fanned by the trinamool congress supporters. despite all these examples  we are made to believe that the  fascist  modi government is out to muzzle voices.an article in theprint spoke about how modi goes to his voters by building a fear complex. is this fear mongering any different  their appeals remind one of what writer james rozoff had said   sheep only need a single flock  but people need two  one to belong to and make them feel comfortable  and another to blame all of society s problems on  the indian electorate is surely wiser than what these worthies collectively think.vikram sampath is an author historian political analyst and a senior fellow at the nehru memorial museum and library  with an upcoming biography of savarkar.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




narendra modi didn t need namo tv or biopics in       he needs both now
text size  a  a is prime minister narendra modi developing worry wrinkles about the outcome of the lok sabha elections on    may  is the image he projects with his charismatic rhetoric  his machismo and supremely self confident air  something of a smokescreen recent weeks suggest that modi may have sensed that his ability to cast a spell on his countrymen requires some media assistance.take for instance  namo tv   a television channel devoted to the prime minister. its logo is pm modi s smiling visage  and since it went on air across cable and dth networks sunday  it has broadcast every campaign speech by modi  live. again  there have been complaints to the election commission by the congress and others  how can a channel be named after pm modi  carry his photograph and promote only him during an election campaign  also read  namo tv has no broadcast licence  didn t even apply for onein between speeches  namo tv repeats telecasts of his other speeches   the current favourite is his reply to the motion of thanks to the president s address during the last budget session of parliament    february   which is replayed at least three times a day.there are also tv promos of the many pradhan mantri yojanas. finally  and from the viewers  perspective the most entertaining  are the films telecast to while away the hours.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthese are not just any old films  they are films carefully chosen to reflect modi  the bjp and its current thinking. hence john abraham s parmanu on the pokhran nuclear test during the vajpayee government  bose about subhash chandra bose  one freedom fighter the bjp is trying to appropriate  padman starring akshay kumar  based on the true story of a man who created a machine to produce affordable sanitary napkins  which ties in perfectly with modi s swachch bharat campaign.the question is  why does the prime minister need a dedicated tv channel to promote him when he already has many news channels furthering his cause   think times now  zee news  republic and of course dd news   and others also cover his each and every move or utterance for instance  sunday s  mein bhi chowkidar  meeting in delhi was a live broadcast across channels.why does he need a tv channel  when he has nearly    million twitter followers     million instagram followers  dedicated whatsapp groups  and the entire bjp chanting  modi  modi  modi  also read  namo tv makes mockery of laws   poll code. it should be shut down immediatelypm modi also granted republic tv s arnab goswami an exclusive interview. goswami was so delighted with this accomplishment that the channel thanked pm modi by telecasting the interview for three days in a row  sometimes thrice a day.the interview was mild and only mildly interesting as goswami did what he had done in a previous interview with modi in        asked him leading questions  this time about the a sat missile strike  pulwama attacks  balakot  etc.  which allowed him to project himself as a strong  decisive leader and to dismiss the opposition with disdain.this is the same message he sends out in his campaign speeches   speeches which are very clearly intended for a national television audience rather than the public at the rally venue.as journalist sharat pradhan said on times now  modi is busy developing a  self created  narrative on a  terrible insecurity hovering over the country  when no such threat exists.contrast this modi interview with the one he gave goswami before the      elections  times now   in which the pm claimed    per cent of his campaign speeches were about  inflation  unemployment  farmers  problems  security  etc. that modi s media messaging now centres on fear and insecurity rather than the nda s achievements  indicates the need for an overarching narrative to whip up emotions  one that will draw attention away from  unemployment  farmers  problems    etc.  in the last five years.also read  bollywood outcast vivek oberoi returns with pm narendra modi by his side to reset his careerotherwise  why would pm modi feel the necessity to take to the airwaves  last week  to announce the successful testing of india s anti satellite weapon in space  although this was no mean achievement  it didn t require the prime minister to address the nation in a live televised broadcast  announced well before the event to leave the country on tenterhooks for the better part of an hour.the election commission dismissed objections and complaints that this announcement had infringed the model code of conduct  on a mere and weak technicality  the national  publicly funded broadcaster  doordarshan  had not recorded it.it ignored the more important issue  was it appropriate for the prime minister to make such a broadcast  in the middle of an electoral campaign   a move tv news channels felt could only  work to  bjp s  advantage   cnn news    and have  an impact on the elections   times now .that modi went ahead with the broadcast  knowing it treads a fine line on the model code  and would raise the hackles and many questions  betrays some uneasiness if not anxiety.modi won the      elections with a great deal of help from the media and tv news channels  but without a dedicated tv channel or biopics.both flank him now   does that mean prime minister narendra modi is a worried man subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




congress reminds modi govt what welfare looks like
text size  a  a when narendra modi was elected prime minister of india in       one of the reasons that many welcomed him  at home and abroad  was that governance in new delhi seemed to have ground to a halt. his predecessors in government  the indian national congress  had once been identified as the party of reform and competence. but  a series of political missteps and growing popular opposition meant that they instead developed a reputation for administrative paralysis.five years on  the choice between modi s bharatiya janata party and the congress  led by rahul gandhi  seems to have been reset. for many  modi s government has not lived up to expectations. while he brought a new energy to governance  a lack of familiarity with policy combined with a lack of competence in his party and cabinet to stymie his more ambitious efforts at reform.this week  when the congress released its manifesto for the forthcoming general elections  it felt like we were back in the     s. much in the manifesto was solidly reformist  it included several longstanding prescriptions from economists and public policy experts including legal reform  devolving more power to local governments and simplifying the goods and services tax. the bjp struggled to come up with coherent  pointed replies to these policy suggestions   even modi s finance minister was reduced to declaring that the manifesto was designed to help separatists break up the country. the contrast between the two sides could not have been sharper and it wasn t the ruling party that sounded like the party of government.for the bjp  this is a lost opportunity. it should not have ceded leadership on economics and policy back to the congress. modi has tried to rebrand himself  in office  as a welfare state populist. but  the congress  manifesto is a reminder that the social democratic party is always going to do better at promising welfare expansions than anyone else. it s pledged that  .  percent of gdp will be redistributed  as an income supplement  to the poorest fifth of india s population. how the hundreds of millions of indians meant to benefit from this would be identified is unclear   nor can anyone say for certain what the impact on prices and the labor market of such a large basic income program would be. even so this promise  of a minimum guaranteed income  has stolen the bjp s thunder  it had hoped its own much smaller income support program for farmers would be sufficient to shore up modi s  pro poor  credentials.the congress of the     s and     s sought to present itself as the only party that could credibly deliver welfare precisely because it was capable of delivering growth  fueled by economic reform. there s something of that dual approach to the party s      manifesto as well. sure  money has been promised to the poor  agricultural loans would be waived and the party has pledged to double public healthcare spending to three percent of gdp. at the same time  the party also has quite a few plans that  if implemented  would be good news for investment and growth.for one  the congress promised reform of tax administration  accusing the current government of giving the taxman  extraordinary discretionary powers that have throttled industry and come to be described as  tax terrorism.   there s some justice to that accusation  especially given the behavior of indian tax authorities over the past week. in the last few days before the end of the financial year  the amount of direct tax collected jumped by over    percent   quite likely because income tax officials arm twisted companies and individuals into paying extra advance tax in order to make the government s figures look good.the congress has also promised that small and medium sized indian companies  as well as all start ups  would not have to file any paperwork for their first three years. given the amount of red tape to which indians have grown accustomed  this is quite a remarkable suggestion. if it were to be implemented  by the congress or anyone else  it might go some way towards changing what the default attitude to regulation in india is. if smaller companies get used to a low interference environment  it will be hard to force them to return to the current  overregulated paradigm. economic reformers have long wondered how to make the political case for deregulation. the congress might have partially solved that problem.it s unfortunate that the bjp  which has traditionally been the party of small business  could not come up with a potentially transformative plan of this sort. perhaps it s revealing of the degree to which modi s statist instincts have taken over. the congress is still unlikely to get anywhere near power once elections are done in may. but  the party has at least reminded modi that welfarism need to be paid for by deregulation and reform.  bloombergalso read  gst  .   more jobs   make for the world  policy   congress manifesto focusses on key areassubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




why modi doesn t mention the dalai lama anymore  while he rages against  enemy pakistan 
text size  a  a prime minister narendra modi has demonstrated two opposite sides of his personality. as he wades into his campaign for the      general elections  modi has repeatedly made charges against  enemy pakistan   which serves the bjp well to conflate its belief that muslims at home as well as those on the other side of the western border cannot be trusted.  the bjp has fielded only one muslim candidate   mahfuza khatun from jangipur in west bengal   in the coming lok sabha elections. at the same time  modi has maintained a stunned silence on the   th anniversary of the arrival of the tibetan spiritual leader  the dalai lama  in india.the    march anniversary passed with absolutely no mention from anyone in the delhi establishment. not from the prime minister or the external affairs minister or home or defence ministers. it s as if the arrival of the dalai lama from chinese ruled tibet in      never happened.this confirms a huge shift in modi s foreign policy thinking on china  which began in april last year when he met chinese president xi jinping in wuhan. it is now becoming increasingly clear  say highly placed sources speaking on the condition of anonymity  that at wuhan  india and china decided they would not air their differences in public.the case of the dalai lama fell into this category.the chinese wanted delhi not to make any public mention of the tibetan leadership living in india. modi is said to have agreed.the dalai lama could still be treated as an honoured guest by the indian government  but that would be all. he could travel inside and outside the country   as the living incarnation of the avalokite vara  even modi could not prevent that.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowalso read  imran khan s china visit shows narendra modi government oversold wuhan summitso  when the   th anniversary of the dalai lama s arrival in india s arunachal pradesh  then called north east frontier agency  or nefa  came around on march     the sound and fury of the      lok sabha elections had taken over.modi was busy castigating the congress party for allegedly asking questions on the balakot air strikes and trying to make them out as  anti national   he was obsessing over the evil designs of pakistan itself and implicitly warning that if it were not for him  india would be over run both by muslims and pakistanis.on the one hand  modi was ensuring that the two nation theory was getting a new life of its own  on the other  he was agreeing with china that the tibetan leaders in india would be roundly ignored   that they would not matter anymore.so the dalai lama has  indeed  arrived in delhi on tuesday  april    to attend a conference on ethical and emotional learning  but the venue cannot be farther than south block in the heart of the capital  where the prime minister s office is located  or in lok kalyan marg  where modi lives.it s as if modi wants the dalai lama to get in and get out of delhi as soon as possible. he wants to have nothing to do with him.even on wuhan s eve  delhi had sent out word that the tibetan community could not hold any events or festivities  thanking india  for letting the dalai lama and thousands of tibetan refugees make their home in india since     .today  the invisibilisation of the dalai lama is almost complete in india   a home he has made for the last    years.also read  as dalai lama turns     indian wariness post wuhan overshadows tibet s futurethe tragedy of the dalai lama s situation cannot be measured by emotions of hurt or grievance or sadness. whether or not the bjp is violating its own much vaunted  atithi devo bhava  principle  the fact is that the modi government could have intelligently used the tibetans as leverage over the chinese.the charge that modi has caved in to the chinese is an old one. after all  even prime ministers atal bihari vajpayee and manmohan singh never met the dalai lama publicly   unlike nehru  who welcomed him to india and gave him a home  or lal bahadur shastri or indira gandhi.but the fact remains that china s expanding presence in all parts of south asia  which india considers its traditional sphere of influence  has been synonymous with modi giving what beijing has wanted. in the hope that if it gives an inch  it will fight back a yard  the modi government has allowed china to creep not stealthily  but openly  inside the indian mainframe.first  there was the doklam incursion in       a shock because no one in delhi could conceive of the chinese people s liberation army  pla  wanting to audaciously build a road in the strategic chumbi valley in bhutan and coming so close to indian territory.second  the widening india china trade deficit has been accompanied by china s insidious and expanding presence. trade data from           shows that india imported    .  billion worth goods from china  and exported less than half      billion.on march     traders in delhi s largest wholesale market  sadar bazar  burned chinese goods like toys  mobile phones  white goods  etc  arguing that these cheap imports were driving them out of business. the drastic step casts a worrying look at the slow destruction of indian manufacturing because of its own distorted policies. at the same time  traders also argue that boycotting chinese products is difficult because  very little is made in india .also read  india s china policy is adrift  but tibet   dalai lama can change thatthird  in the wake of the balakot air strikes  china has continued to block the move to have masood azhar  whose jaish e mohammed took responsibility for the pulwama attack  designated as a global terrorist at the un security council.if modi believed that the wuhan spirit meant that china would also show generosity to its asian rival  then all the evidence points the other way.theprint s own china watcher  col  retd  vinayak bhatt  points out that as the snows melt  the chinese pla has returned to building roads near doklam and even a possible heliport.if modi wanted to  he could have shown xi jinping that two can play the same game   by meeting and welcoming the dalai lama while continuing to promise publicly that tibet is an alienable part of china. there isn t much that india can do on the ground  in any case. china s control of tibet is far too strong  it has expanded into south asia in a way that is hardly reversible  and its imprint on indian trade cannot be overturned in a hurry.perhaps  modi the new chanakya could have borrowed a leaf or two out of confucius  the shadow play is  in any case  a chinese invention.at the end of modi s tenure  the question remains  what has modi done to prevent china from further becoming india s achilles heel subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




whether or not modi remains pm in       a new political generation will slowly eclipse the old
text size  a  a the lok sabha elections in the months of april and may will not only determine the near future of india  but also make it clear who will be eclipsed on the political horizon and who will be the new generation of leaders   both dynasts and non dynasts.young politicians without any political legacy have joined the electoral fray  such as jignesh mevani  hardik patel and kanhaiya kumar. even actor urmila matondkar has come on board with the congress.a new  gen next although in indian politics  the term  gen next  is often associated with a family passing their baton to the younger kith and kin  another kind of gen next is now changing our political landscape.the congress welcoming hardik patel into the party  adjusting with jignesh mevani and taking in urmila matondkar are signs that the party is practicing a non dynastic approach to politics. there are many more such examples in the states.a few mass leaders in the farmers  movement  tribal leaders in chhattisgarh  as well as many activists from the environment movement have chosen to bring their non government organisations  ngos  into active politics. some men and women from the world of art  literature and media are also joining politics. most of them have not yet made it to the national headlines or front pages. but some of these young or middle aged activists have either been given tickets or promised assembly entries.also read  what will narendra modi do if he is not pm in      a new political canvasyet  a new thesis currently in circulation suggests that the congress is actually aiming at      and not this year s hotly contested elections. there is no evidence for this hypothesis. the failure of mahagathbandhan is considered by these analysts as the congress  greatest shortcoming. they think the party is simply not being serious enough about challenging narendra modi. these analysts do not even mention the ideology of strident anti congressism that has been the main hurdle to opposition unity.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbe that as it may  the year      will surely see a completely different set of politicians in elections and in power. the transfer of generation has already set in. l.k. advani andmurli manohar joshi may are the most striking examples of this. but the sun is also setting on the leadership of mulayam singh yadav  sharad pawar  lalu prasad yadav  deve gowda  virbhadra singh  even naveen patnaik and nitish kumar  and perhaps arun jaitley and sushma swaraj.the political canvas is already witnessing a rise of next generation of dynasts and non dynasts   the latter with experience in civil society  farmer or tribal movements. but what are the agendas or issues that this diverse class of gen next politicians will pursue  it is interesting to note that neither the dynasts nor the activists have a working ideology to fight for.also read  unlike vajpayee   advani  gen next bjp leaders groomed by modi shah don t look promisingelection scenarioswill hindutva trigger the same passion and violence in the politics of       will the frenzy of nationalism be felt again  narendra modi will be    by then. by his own party s rule  he won t contest that election. will his successor be able to hold the party together  in the absence of a clear ideology and aim  there will be chaos in parliament and on the streets  as the economy goes for a free fall.anyone watching the shenanigans in the bjp closely can tell that the party is held together because of power  modi s omnipresence  the fear factor and the absence of a united opposition.once that bond of fear and media generated modi charisma wanes  the bjp could rapidly fall into a semi byzantine disorder. the only cementing force that could remain would be the network of the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh  rss . the rss would also provide the ideology. it is not clear yet who brought the bjp to power in       the rss network or narendra modi s hyper political campaign.the question  therefore  is not who comes to power or who becomes prime minister in     . for the last five years  modi s bjp and the rss have had one primary agenda  to win elections. the ideology was hindutva driven nationalism and the pretence was economic reforms.if modi becomes pm again  his agenda of coming back for a second time will be fulfilled. if  on the other hand  there is a big drop in the number of the bjp seats but the nda gets the majority  then maths will define the scenario and not ideology.those who are confident that modi will continue to be the prime minister say that the president  the election commission  the judiciary  the intelligence agencies  the ed and the i t department  and the financial institutions  mainly the reserve bank  are loyal to him. they will not let the apple cart break down.also read  not just rahul gandhi  one in    world leaders comes from households with political tieswill the party choose another leader is a moot question. there is already speculation that amit shah could be the next candidate and not nitin gadkari. how many party leaders and nda partners will support shah is another intriguing question.however  if indeed the nda fails to form a stable government  then modi will have to sit in opposition  either as the leader of the opposition or campaigning to destabilise the coalition in power. if the skulduggery succeeds  then he can also create a situation for a mid term poll. how far his party  the nda partners and the rss will join him in this  to go for another election  is difficult to say at this moment.one thing is for sure  the month of may will decide who is removed from the political stage  and which gen next leaders will take their place.kumar ketkar is a former editor and congress member of rajya sabha.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




under modi regime  the election commission needs the spine of former cec t.n. seshan
text size  a  a to say that in the last five years of the pm narendra modi government most independent institutions in india have lost their halo would be stating the obvious. but the one institution that has a lot of explaining to do is the election commission. time and again  the election commission has allowed the government to escape without even a cursory rap on the knuckles.it is often said that once is chance  twice is coincidence and the third time is a pattern. for our national poll regulator  the pattern is too obvious.the  rampage  of t.n. seshangone are the days when foreign newspapers would write articles on chief election commissioners like t.n. seshan referring to him as  india s scourge of money  muscle and ministers.  even a few months ago  before the madhya pradesh assembly election  the supreme court told the election commission to retain the credibility it had during seshan s days.t.n. seshan was the chief election commissioner from        .while seshan could be very unreasonable at times  it didn t take anything away from his commitment to free and fair elections. such was his terror that in october       the p.v. narasimha rao government decided to turn the election commission into a multi member body  appointing m.s. gill and g.v.g krishnamurthy as election commissioners  and restricting seshan s powers. ironically  four years earlier  in october       the rajiv gandhi government had appointed s.s. dhanoa and v.s. seigell as election commissioners under r.v.s. peri shastri  although the appointments were rescinded within months  leading to a legal battle in the supreme court. dhanoa  a former chief secretary of punjab  incidentally  is the father of current indian air force chief b.s. dhanoa.four years later  when the government got an ordinance promulgated to appoint two election commissioners  it was seshan s turn to go to the supreme court.also read  a birthday tribute for tn seshan  the only man alongside god whom indian politicians fearedwe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowhowever  the court sided with the government  but not before citing one important paragraph from the dhanoa case judgment   there is no doubt that two heads are better than one  and particularly when an institution like the election commission is entrusted with vital functions  and is armed with exclusive uncontrolled powers to execute them  it is both necessary and desirable that the powers are not exercised by one individual  however  all wise he may be. it ill conforms the tenets of the democratic rule. it is true that the independence of an institution depends upon the persons who main it and not on their number. a single individual may sometimes prove capable of withstanding all the pulls and pressures  which many may not. however  when vast powers are exercised by an institution which is accountable to none  it is politic to entrust its affairs to more hands than one. but seshan was not ready to be tamed. when the government started dragging its feet on issuing photo identity cards to voters  seshan threatened to use rule    of representation of peoples act to not hold any elections after   january     . the matter was resolved in court  but photo identity cards soon became a must.the credit for turning a tooth less model code of conduct into a virtual rulebook  which had to be strictly followed by the government and opposition alike  also goes to seshan. senior police officers and civil servants were transferred even on minor counts of what the seshan led election commission considered misdemeanours  governors and senior ministers were handed out censures without any second thought  with the public gleefully enjoying the travails of the politicians and officers  who appeared powerless before a rampaging election commission.also read  not just bjp  every political party loves a subservient election commissionthe times they are a changin t.n. seshan s successors also didn t restrain themselves  often acting tough against the government of the day just to send out a message that they were committed to levelling the playing field.under the upa ii regime  then chief election commissioner s.y. quraishi called law minister salman khurshid to nirvachan sadan for a meeting on electoral reforms  because an  independent  election commission going to shastri bhawan  which houses the law ministry  could send out the wrong signal.times have changed now.under the narendra modi regime  the election commission appears like an extension of the central government.the fate of other institutions hasn t been too good either. the cbi is now a dead  not a caged  parrot. the central vigilance commission  cvc   the central information commission  cic   the enforcement directorate  ed   the income tax department are not even pretending to appear independent.the supreme court has also failed on several occasions to stand up to the bullying by the modi government on issues related to appointments in higher judiciary.the only institution that has shown some spunk in recent times is the comptroller and auditor general  cag   which many in the opposition had thought would give a clean chit to the modi government for its controversial purchase of the rafale fighter jets. the report was anything but.also read  we must save the election commission from the clutches of indian politiciansfor every questionable thing that the government s senior functionaries do  the election commission is seen as trying to come up with an explanation to justify not taking any action.in fact  one may be excused for forming the impression that the election commission has acted more against the opposition and opposition ruled state governments than against the bjp and its allies. even in various courts  whenever issues related to transparency and electoral reforms have been raised  the response of the election commission was often found to be lacking.pushing the envelope or sending out a forceful message to the political class  especially those ruling us  is something that one can t associate with the election commission any longer.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




defeating modi at any cost may suit modi baiters  but it can t arrest congress slide
text size  a  a the congress party has swung in full campaign mode for the      general elections with its promise of income support of rs        per annum to the poorest    per cent families under the nyuntam aay yojana. with this move  the party expects to undercut the bjp s potential gains from the rs       annual cash transfer to small farmers and shift the election discourse away from national security and terrorism.many observers say that if the congress manages to reach out to the voters with feel good messages about this plan  it could be a game changer for the party.while empirical evidence on the electoral impact of making such announcements a few weeks prior to polling is rather scant  the congress sympathisers cite the example of their party s promise in the chhattisgarh assembly election last year. reports suggest that farmers in the state delayed selling their paddy in expectation of the congress party increasing the price of paddy if voted in power.notwithstanding this announcement  what are the realistic chances of the congress party in the      elections  the opinion on this is extremely divided. some believe that the congress party has given up its hope on the      elections and is instead preparing for the      general elections.also read  rahul gandhi s nyay raises too many questions   is not the answer to ending povertypolitical commentators have argued that the congress party does not seem eager to make alliances and has been making unreasonable demands on the regional parties in many states.others argue that the bjp is likely to suffer losses in the hindi heartland and the congress is likely to be its principal beneficiary.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthis argument has been further buttressed by looking at the results of the      elections  when the congress won    seats and stood second on     others. the commentators claim that since many of these second position seats were in the hindi heartland states of madhya pradesh  chhattisgarh  rajasthan and haryana  three of which it now rules   the congress would be a direct beneficiary of any discontent against the modi government.and yet  the optimism around the congress s fortunes in the      lok sabha elections is not borne out by the data. on the contrary  a disaggregated analysis of the      verdict and recent trends on these seats reveal that the scope for gain for the congress party is rather limited for three reasons.first  the congress revival in this election is difficult due to its extremely low base. in       the party s seat tally and vote share were abysmally low  and two of every five congress candidates had lost their security deposit  i.e. polled less than one sixth of the total votes cast . the party may not only find it extremely difficult to cross     seats but may also slide further down in some states.there is no doubt that the congress can win a fraction of     seats where it had stood second  but one can also not deny the possibility of the party losing seats it had won by a narrow margin. in       the congress had won    of its    seats with a margin of less than five percentage points.second  the gap between the congress and its nearest rival in     of the    seats it stood second on was more than    percentage points. in most of these seats  the bjp and the congress are in a direct contest. while the congress may improve its tally by adding a few more seats  a dramatic change in the party s fortunes is unlikely. the bjp had a substantial lead over the congress in many of these seats. the victory margin of the bjp on    of these seats was more than    percentage points.unless there is a massive swing against the bjp  the congress is unlikely to make serious gains in rajasthan and madhya pradesh  where it won the assembly elections in december     . however  congress could certainly hurt the bjp in chhattisgarh.third  and more importantly  a worrying sign for the congress is that in a few states like odisha  tripura  and nagaland  the party is unlikely to be the principal opposition party and may relegate to third position. unlike madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh  where the congress could bounce back after being in the opposition for fifteen years  these states are multi polar. hence  the congress would no longer be the only viable opposition.also read  why rahul gandhi s congress is in danger of morphing into a clueless ngodoes this mean that the congress has done nothing to challenge modi in      while it is true that the party has not gone out of its way to seal alliances  the party does have strong pre election coalitions in many states such as jharkhand  tamil nadu  and karnataka. it is hoping for a revival in uttar pradesh by bringing in priyanka gandhi vadra to campaign and nominating some strong candidates.furthermore  the party has made conscious effort to shift the election narrative from just national security to issues of unemployment  agrarian crisis  and corruption.but the tragedy of the congress  campaign is that none of its charges against the modi government are getting the kind of traction the party would have expected.also read  not only votes  but dividing the opposition helps political parties win elections in indiathere are no easy solutions to the congress  internal dilemma of prioritising between its twin objectives   the ouster of the bjp government or  and  arresting its electoral decline. much like in the game of cricket  when a virender sehwag or chris gayle are in their top form  they give even the best bowlers a run for their money. even a mis hit somehow reaches the boundary and then yorkers get a treatment of a bad full toss.similarly  there are moments in political time when the opposition seems to get nothing right. that does not mean the congress party is unaware of the ground realities and is not doing anything right. recall the      elections  the opposition had stitched a nation wide grand alliance against indira gandhi  yet she emerged victorious with even a bigger mandate.it is very much possible that the congress could end up losing on both fronts by chasing the twin objectives simultaneously. a single minded pursuit of defeating the modi government at any cost may go well with modi baiters  but that may not necessarily arrest the electoral slide of the congress. the party has chosen a high risk  high reward strategy   it may fall flat  but it can also bring windfall gains.rahul verma is fellow at the centre for policy research  delhi. pranav gupta is a phd student in political science at the university of california at berkeley  us.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




ousting modi or reviving congress  rahul gandhi knows the answer
text size  a  a congress president rahul gandhi has left narendra modi baiters extremely upset. with alliances largely in place  battle lines drawn  they now know his views on the much debated question about his priority in the      lok sabha elections  ousting modi or reviving the congress but they are unmindful of the fact that it s not pm modi who is the biggest political enemy of rahul gandhi or the congress  it s the regional outfits.a large number of liberals  innately opposed to modi or anyone even remotely linked to the rss and those greatly disillusioned with him due to lapses in governance  wanted the congress president to just dethrone modi. it had as much to do with their ideological pride and prejudice as with their lack of trust in the congress leader to achieve the revival of the congress. they are infuriated with rahul gandhi now because he may have jeopardised  mission oust modi  by taking his own sweet time to seal alliances.also read  why rahul gandhi s congress is in danger of morphing into a clueless ngothe last shotrahul gandhi would have his congress colleagues believe that he is a master strategist who can achieve both goals. it s beside the point that the party s internal assessment as of today gives it    seats only in the coming elections. this tally is expected to go up to     or even     by the last day of polls  depending on whether you are talking to battle hardened warriors or to dream merchants in the congress. if this is the best scenario for the congress in       as per its own assessment  rahul gandhi might be right in driving hard seat sharing bargains with regional outfits.is ousting modi more important for the congress at this stage  so important that it should play second fiddle to regional parties and keep ceding its space  there is near unanimity in political circles and the commentariat  yes  it is. the congress will be finished if modi is in power for the next five years  they say. much of this apprehension emanates from the fact that the saffron juggernaut was unstoppable for five years. modi amit shah virtually attained their goal of a  congress mukt bharat  by last november when the grand old party s rule was reduced to just mizoram  puducherry  punjab and karnataka  as a junior coalition partner . during the same period  the congress has been in disarray and its top leader the butt of ridicule.so  what does the congress achieve by ousting modi  an immediate shot at power  one assumes. and power is the only lifeline of the congress. but can gandhi hope to become the prime minister with         seats in the     member lok sabha we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowtheoretically  he can. manmohan singh became the prime minister in      with the congress tally reading just    . but then the left front gave it a solid cushion of    seats.the congress got     seats in       but it had to prop up a united front government led by deve gowda whose party secured just    seats. the moral of the story is that rahul gandhi could be the last leader to have a shy at the prime minister s post if the congress tally is below      the most optimistic figure predicted by congressmen   especially when      could be the last chance for many veteran non congress leaders to realise their dreams.and if the congress has to prop up a third front leader as the prime minister  why should it cede any ground to regional outfits besides  these arguments are premised on the possibility of the nda not getting a majority. in fact  if the congress is anywhere near      the ruling coalition would have a great chance of returning to power with a clear majority. if one were to assume that the      verdict would be so fractured that both the bjp and the congress would feel compelled to prop up a prime minister from another party  modi and shah have proven talent and resources to deny the congress this opportunity.so  to repeat the question in different words  what should rahul gandhi concentrate on ousting modi by ceding his party s space or using the opportunity to consolidate  if not expand  its base in states also read  rahul gandhi is wrong in thinking anti bjp votes will automatically come to congressstates  step by stepknowing the number of incorrigible optimists in the opposition party  i should present the worst scenario this way  even if modi gets another term  it wouldn t perforce be doomsday for the congress. rahul gandhi must have read john bunyan   he that is down need fear no fall . besides  as the last round of assembly elections in november december showed  when tested against anti incumbency  the saffron party falters as it did in madhya pradesh  chhattisgarh and rajasthan  and earlier in goa and punjab .even if the nda manages to keep the congress out of power at the centre in       the opposition party would be regaining its relevance nationally step by step as    nda ruled states go to polls in coming months and years.there is no state where the bjp could reduce the congress into irrelevance for good  seemingly. even in gujarat where the congress has been out of power since       it has remained a political force to reckon with. but in states where regional outfits have weaned away the congress  social base  the grand old party has been left on the political margins and reduced to irrelevance tamil nadu  uttar pradesh  bihar  west bengal  odisha  andhra pradesh  and telangana  the last two being the most recent .the bjp has shown its ability to feed on smaller  regional parties but it s the other way round in the case of congress. therefore  rahul gandhi s decision to play hard ball with regional parties may not be as thoughtless and reckless as some bleeding hearts in the so called secular camp make it out to be.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




what narendra modi   rahul gandhi can learn from elections in indonesia
text size  a  a in a hamlet nestled deep in sumatra s palm country  headman slamet   who  like many indonesians  goes by only one name   was eagerly showing off a     meter stretch of concrete to the nation s minister for villages one recent march afternoon.if indonesia s president joko widodo can beat a path to a second term on april     he should give credit to the two meter wide road   and to the popular village fund program that financed its construction  overseen by minister eko putro sandjojo.that    trillion rupiah     billion  program  named dana desa  literally  the wealth of villages   has on average built a little more than     meters of roads a year in each rural agglomeration. modest  think again  the archipelago has        villages. that s         kilometers of roads over the first four years of the program  more than a third of the network that existed in     .jokowi  as the president is known  came to power in     . alongside inheriting a massive shortage of public infrastructure  he also got the benefit of a newly passed law that aimed for the first time in the nation s history to guarantee a part of the state budget to villages. the idea was to let the nearly half of indonesia s     million people who live in rural areas decide for themselves whether they needed a maternity center or a communal toilet.villagers  associations had demanded a billion rupiah for each settlement. but instead of allocating    trillion rupiah  jokowi gave only    trillion rupiah in the first year. even then only    percent of the money was used. so the president plucked the engineer mba eko from the private sector to run dana desa  and doubled the allocation.with        university trained facilitators educating villagers in the complex accounting they need to get their projects approved and audited  fund use is now running at    percent. the budget has bulked up to a minimum     million rupiah per village. depending on area  population and underdevelopment  the amount can go up to   billion rupiah.also read  indonesia grabs the upper hand over india in battle of high yielding bond marketswe are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe success of the fund could play a role in jokowi s reelection bid. when it comes to articulating grand ideas  rival prabowo subianto  a pedigreed ex general  wins hands down over former furniture maker jokowi. the urban middle class  who had backed jokowi as an underdog in       is now disillusioned. some businessmen believe they re losing opportunities to state owned enterprises  even as the tax authorities try to extract more revenue from them. signature projects like the chinese built jakarta bandung high speed rail haven t progressed. five surveys give jokowi a lead of    percent to    percent over prabowo   but with    percent to    percent of voters undecided  it could be a close race.to the extent jokowi does have an advantage  it comes from the grassroots where the main issues are livelihood and identity. villages minister eko comes from a political party that represents islam nusantara  a tolerant indonesian tradition at peace with indigenous customs. it s in a battle for hearts and minds with a more puritanical wahhabi influence rushing in from the middle east  feasting on social media falsehoods and hatred. as a result  economic development is crucial. jokowi   or for that matter  indonesia   can t afford a lumpen army of    million millennial voters with nothing to do because the china fueled commodity boom has gone bust.as a former businessman  eko believes in scale. pandeglang district in southwestern java wanted to plant corn. eko s team identified        hectares of abandoned land  organised free seeds  fertilizer and tractors  brokered a sales contract to a poultry feed mill  and then used that to get loans for the villagers. suddenly  a   trillion rupiah corn economy has sprung up in a region where    percent of villages were considered underdeveloped in     . by the end of this year  all settlements in pandeglang will have shed that tag  eko says.poverty in villages has fallen by   percentage point since march       helping pull the nationwide rate to below    percent. dana desa is also fighting stunting in children  thereby lifting future economic capacity. there are lessons here for india ahead of its own elections starting next month  with the two main parties trying to outdo each other on direct cash transfers to people amid agrarian distress and insufficient urban wages. as rathin roy of the new delhi based national institute of public finance and policy puts it  india is transitioning from a development state to a compensatory state.also read  millennial voters will be the face of india   indonesia in     resource rich indonesia  with a far smaller problem of mass poverty  is sticking to development   and there s plenty of work still to do.as we head back toward the airport in bengkulu  eko points to thickets of palm or rubber where trucks can t go. how will people move that produce to markets  he asks. it s no empty musing.if the minister fails to solve similar problems for indonesia s rural population  he risks losing voters to fake news that jokowi is a communist  a christian or an ethnic chinese. that s an issue that should matter to the world well beyond the back country of sumatra.   bloombergsubscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




right skills   right jobs  how modi govt s grameen kaushalya yojana is helping rural youth
text size  a  a india s  demographic dividend  faces the dual challenge of paucity of highly trained workforce and unemployable educated youth with little or no on the job skills. to bridge this gap  prime minister narendra modi s government began the much touted  skill india  programme  dovetailing other ambitious programmes like make in india  digital india  smart cities  start up india and stand up india.as one of the youngest nations of the world with more than    per cent of its population in the working group of    to    years  india has a burgeoning aspirational generation. modi set up the ministry for skill development and entrepreneurship in november      to focus specifically on this area.the national policy for skill development and entrepreneurship      identified a skills gap of    .   million people in    key sectors of the economy by     . it would be impossible to fill this gap without taking into account the bottom of the pyramid    million from rural india who are in the age group of       years.to specifically address the skilling and employment needs of the rural youth  the modi government launched the deen dayal upadhyaya grameen kaushalya yojana  ddu gky  on    september     . this scheme was tasked with diversifying the incomes of the rural poor and catering to the employment aspirations of the young.also read  jobless youth are a reality. modi can t hide behind misleading data and a media spina skilling ecosystem has since been created that includes the ministry of rural development  the national mission management unit  nmmu or nu   state missions  project implementing agencies  pia  or training partners and technical support agencies. the unique feature of the scheme is internships and industry partnerships that have enabled a minimum placement of    per cent for trained candidates and a lower end of a monthly salary of rs       each.the ddu gky places a stipulation that    per cent of the candidates needs to be from the sc st community     per cent from minorities     per cent women and   per cent people with disabilities.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowthe pia training that follows ranges from a minimum of   months to a maximum of   year  and allows for on the job training  ojt  as well. a mandated     hours of training is on soft skills  functional english and computer literacy. additionally  a finishing module called  work readiness training  ensures candidates are job ready.post training  independent third parties assess the skills acquired. this  too  is facilitated by the government. successful candidates are then provided with government recognised and co branded skill certificates. a candidate is considered  placed  under the scheme if she he has continuous   month employment. even after placement  the candidates are provided with additional support for close to a year.aijaz ahmad dar  a    year old man  hails from the interiors of budgam district in jammu and kashmir. his father  a driver  struggled to make ends meet. lack of specific job skills and political unrest in kashmir led to aijaz sitting idle at home. a friend advised him about the gky scheme. the hospitality sector had always fascinated him and so he decided to opt for a course under it.  i had a counselling session in the training institute orion edutech pvt. ltd who assessed my aptitude. apart from the training  i also received soft skills training that was very useful. mock interview sessions were held that helped me prepare for job interviews   aijaz told me. his hard work bore fruits and aijaz is now placed as a front office associate in srinagar at a kentucky fried chicken  kfc  outlet. he earns a decent salary of rs        per month and it has helped his family greatly.also read  teaching tech to young  kerala offers a solution to india s jobs crisis in it sectorfrom across the country  in manipur s nungsai chiru village  k.s. parlen chiru has a similar tale to tell.  my father is    years old and my mother in her late   s. i have three younger siblings whose responsibility  by and large  fall on me. i completed my   thstandard education and wanted to secure a good job to support my large family. however  it was impossible to get one   chiru said. that is when one of the mobiliser teams of thinkskills consulting pvt. ltd came on a visit to his village. he decided to opt for the food and beverage training course that they offered. he was given a   month intensive training session on communication skills  it and service skills  and then sent for an interview.  i can t tell you how nervous i was during the interview that was conducted over skype for the position of a steward at taco bell in bengaluru   he said. he emerged successful and moved to bengaluru for the job that pays him rs        per month  in addition to food and accommodation. in just a few months  he was delighted to receive the best employee award at taco bell.  i never thought i would be successful in life. thanks to the kaushal yojana my life has changed completely. i am able to save money and send it back home to my family. i now want to get promoted soon to the next level in taco bell  and also save money to study further. i think it is possible   he beams with excitement.santosh bhatnagar  a    year old woman from udaipur in rajasthan  completed her   th standard education  but could not any study further due to lack of funds. she enrolled for the skilling course at nifa udaipur where she was taught courses on apparel stitching  basic computer training and communication skills. she then got placed as a sewing machine operator in monetary solutions earning rs        per month.  not only am i now financially empowered  but i just feel a lot more confident. i saw so many other women candidates at the training centre and all of them are placed. we keep meeting and sharing our experiences. our instructors too kept supporting us for several months after the placement and enquiring about our new jobs. the pessimism that i used to deal with before is gone and i also feel hopeful that i can continue my studies up to graduation if i work and save up money for a few years   she said.speaking to the elder sister of    year old neeraj from haryana was an emotional experience. not only had neeraj lost his parents at a young age  but he also had speech and hearing problems.  we led a miserable life and i used to look after neeraj. but at some point  he had to stand up on his own feet and take care of his life. i heard about the gky scheme on the radio and got him enrolled there   his sister told me. for two months  neeraj was given rigorous training at the navjyoti global solutions pvt. ltd and later accepted as a retail sales associate in lemon tree hotels in march     . he manages to earn rs        a month.also read  manipuris in mysore taco bell  why english and philosophy are key to india s jobs crisisthese are merely a handful of inspiring stories that emerge from the ddu gky scheme. since its inception  it has spread its reach across    states and union territories  covering     districts and impacting youth from more than       blocks. the current statistic is that more than     projects have been implemented by over     partners  in more than     trades from    industry sectors. with an investment of over rs       crores  more than  .  lakh candidates have been trained and over  .   lakh candidates placed in jobs already.the grameen kaushal yojana is testament to the fact that with just a few months of training  hard work  the right ecosystem  not only can our youth be imparted with skills  but also empowered to lead a life of dignity  confidence and self reliance.this is the seventh part of a series on the author s conversations with beneficiaries of schemes launched by the narendra modi government. read the others here.the author is a writer historian political analyst and a senior research fellow at the nehru memorial museum and library.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




bollywood outcast vivek oberoi returns with pm narendra modi by his side to reset his career
text size  a  a among the many memes circulated during the      swearing in of narendra modi as the prime minister  one was particularly spot on. it was about the presence of bollywood actors salman khan and vivek oberoi at the event. it said   divided by aishwarya  united by modi. that was an early sign of what modi s fandom could do   bring together even sworn enemies from bollywood on the same stage. nearly five years later  and after moments of bonding with several filmstars  pm narendra modi is set to make it to the silver screen  where the one taking an oath for him is  vivek oberoi.from congratulating modi on his  thundering win  for a third term as the chief minister of gujarat to wishing him on his birthday  vivek oberoi has followed modi long before other celebrities jumped onto the modi bandwagon.as proud indian citizens  we all must leave no stone unturned to fight any evil in our country. lets all pledge to unite towards a stronger and progressive india. we are all with you  narendramodi ji. jai hind     mainbhichowkidar   vivek anand oberoi   vivekoberoi  march         many happy returns of the day to our honorable pm  narendramodi ji. wish you a long  healthy and prosperous life. your selflessness is an inspiration to all of us. more power to you sir   happybdaypmmodi pic.twitter.com n d xzqvwy   vivek anand oberoi   vivekoberoi  september         when the schedule for the      lok sabha elections were announced  prime minister narendra modi called upon several film and media personalities on twitter  encouraging them in made to order tweets to  enrich the      lok sabha elections with their active participation . in specially curated tweets  he called upon actors such as mohanlal and nagarjuna     march  as well as ranveer singh  varun dhawan and vicky kaushal to motivate youngsters.also read  pm modi s biopic starring vivek oberoi to be released in the middle of poll seasonthe run up to the general elections      has seen bollywood s pop patriarch karan johar shepherding a group of young stars  from ranveer singh to ranbir kapoor  from ayushmann khurrana to bhumi pednekar to meet the prime minister and promise to make  nation building  cinema. it has seen a series of nationalistic movies  from kangana ranaut s manikarnika to akshay kumar s kesari. and it has seen the election staple of the entry of stars into politics amplified across parties  from urmila matondkar joining congress to nusrat jahan joining trinamool congress.but fanboy vivek oberoi s assiduous devotion taking the form of hagiography was perhaps the natural culmination of the modi fication of bollywood and the politicisation of other cinemas. the trailer of pm narendra modi  the forthcoming biopic on the prime minister that is controversially scheduled to release on   april  a week before voting begins for the      lok sabha elections  gives us a sense of the deification of the man   with dialogues such as  jo desh ko chahte hain  woh aur kuch nahin chahte    desh ke har kone mein tiranga lehrayega    hindustan aatank se nahin  aatank hindustan se darega   and  hindustan banne ke baad bhi hum hindustani nahin ban paaye . filmmaker omung kumar s depiction of narendra modi s life comes along with a web series on eros now  called modi  journey of a common man  capping an unusually hectic political season.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowbut vivek oberoi s support to modi is part of his family s political tradition. vivek s father  suresh oberoi  has been a member of the bjp since       joining the party in the company of gajendra chauhan  who played yudhisthira in tv series mahabharata and went on to head the ftii  and navjot singh sidhu  who went on to join the congress.vivek oberoi  in fact  got married into a political family   his late father in law jeevaraj alva was a karnataka powerhouse  and was for many years in the janata dal  united . oberoi even campaigned for his mother in law  nandini alva  in       when she contested and lost the lok sabha election from bangalore  central  on a jd u  ticket.vivek oberoi was an active campaigner for the bjp in the      lok sabha elections  turning up in person to endorse prime minister modi in varanasi  union finance minister arun jaitley in amritsar and general v.k. singh in ghaziabad. vivek  however  was also among the celebrities stung by cobrapost in its cash for social media endorsement of bjp expose  cobrapost karaoke.for the producer of pm narendra modi  sandip singh  vivek oberoi was the only choice to play the prime minister.  i needed someone who would give me a year of his life and who was as crazy as i was. we started the shoot of the film on january    and ended on march     it was not a simple film  because it spans      to      and encompasses nine or ten looks for vivek. we could do it only because we had planned it meticulously. every day  vivek would come for the shoot at  .   am  sit for six hours in make up and then go without food till the shoot ended at   pm  because you can t eat with prosthetics.  singh  who has known oberoi since he was a journalist and the latter was a debutant on the sets of company         says they are both deeply interested in politics.for those who came in late  oberoi had self destructed live on television  on   april      .he had accused salman khan of calling him in a drunken state as many as    times and using  gutter se gandi zubaan  linking him to aishwarya rai  as well as dia mirza  rani mukerji and somy ali . it is a moment that oberoi has publicly regretted many times since  apologising to khan at awards functions  going to meet his mother in hospital  and even going on a tv show anchored by director farah khan  tere mere beech main        star plus  to say  i became an outcast overnight .  i was made fun of at every award show  people were told not to work with me  and signing amounts were returned to me   he told khan  adding that it was like starting over again with a  major minus . he was also less than charitable about rai  saying  there is less plastic in a tupperware factory than our film industry. people with plastic smile and plastic heart. salman khan has strenuously denied having a role in sabotaging oberoi s career  saying on rajat sharma s aap ki adalat on india tv in        har cheez ki expiry date hoti hai. anger ki bhi expiry date honi chahiye. but woh naam kya hai unka   at which point  sharma helpfully supplies it  vivek oberoi  i won t shake hands or talk to him ever again. also read  former civil servants urge ec to stall release of modi biopic until election resultsmuch as vivek oberoi would like to paint himself as the boy who lost his career to big boss salman khan  there is more to it. at that point in       oberoi was said to be dating his co star aishwarya rai  who had recently broken off with salman khan. there were stories of oberoi gifting rai a puppy named sunshine and being by her side when she was flown to mumbai on a stretcher after an accident on the sets of khakee. rai was bollywood s reigning queen  having also captured cannes with devdas in     . oberoi was the golden boy whom directors as varied as mani ratnam and vishal bharadwaj wanted to cast. oberoi and rai were acting in what seemed like the perfect rom com vehicle for them  directed by oberoi s senior from ajmer s mayo college  samir karnik. and if there was any doubt about their chemistry  they even did a coca cola ad together to complete the equation with   piyo thanda  jiyo thanda  coca cola .it was a match made in heaven. except that it wasn t. oberoi  who had been hailed in       just after company and mani ratnam penned saathiya  as the next big thing  found his star had crashed. in a profile written in india today then  karan johar  who has gone on to become one of the most powerful producers in bollywood today  was quoted as saying   vivek has a screen presence. he will be a big star. perhaps it was all a bit too much for a    year old who had just entered the industry. sujoy ghosh  who directed oberoi in home delivery        says he will always be grateful to vivek who chose to work with him at the peak of his career.  that was very gracious of him. he could easily have refused. i really couldn t answer why his later films didn t work because no one knows why a film works or fails. that s the beauty of cinema. all of us are always starting from scratch with each film   ghosh said.whatever the reason  oberoi could never fulfil his early promise  although his career has seen occasional success playing arjun balachandran in mani ratnam s yuva         kesu in vishal bhardwaj s omkara        and as maya dolas in apoorva lakhia s shootout at lokhandwala       . of late  his most memorable roles have been those of villains  from kaal in krrish    which he had reportedly said was inspired by heath ledger s life defining act as joker in the dark knight       and set off a social media controversy  to cricket entrepreneur vikrant dhawan with a passion for yamazaki single malt and wagyu steak in amazon prime s inside edge. his career s second biggest hit has been an adult sex comedy grand masti  a sequel to masti  co starring aftab shivdasani and ritesh deshmukh. its idea of humour  dialogues such as this abound in it   balaatkaar se yaad aaya  meri biwi kaha hai   his biggest hit  krrish   starring hrithik roshan.also read  the double life of anupam kher  hollywood s favourite desi   bjp s pin up patriotoberoi shares another trait with his erstwhile love rival salman khan   a passion for charitable acts. these have varied from rebuilding an entire village affected by the tsunami in      to donating houses to families of    crpf personnel killed in action. these were built by his company karrm infrastructure. oberoi has been a good businessman  entering the construction business in      with raghuleela infrastructure  in which he owns the majority equity. in       the company announced its investment plans in gujarat  where it is now developing a luxury township and a theme based resort called royal beach city the goa. in       he launched karrm infrastructure  entering the affordable housing segment in maharashtra. he also runs a non profit called one foundation focused on empowerment and nation building  according to the same newspaper article.perfect resume  right  philanthropy. add to that talent  honed at new york university  and a director s roster that includes india s finest  from mani ratnam to vishal bharadwaj. his most recent co actor  darshan kumaar  who plays a journalist based on rajdeep sardesai in pm narendra modi  says oberoi is a  hard working and passionate actor who believes in leaving no stone unturned in making a good film .perhaps the song khallas  from his first film company sums up oberoi s life at the movies   bachke tu rehna rey bachke tu rehna nahi duja mauka milega sambhalna  be careful  you won t get a second chance. be careful . is the biopic on prime minister modi his second chance or is it too late  bollywood knows best.the author is a senior journalist.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




 india declares war on space    other absurd things tv anchors said after modi s a sat speech
text size  a  a up in the sky  it s a bird  it s a plane  it s superman. actually  it s a  satellite   zee news  india today   a  missile   times now  ndtv       wion  and a  white streak in the sky   india tv  culminating in a  great ball of fire   zee news  india today  as india conducted a  space surgical strike   india tv  to blow up a leo  low earth orbit satellite  that prime minister narendra modi announced wednesday.looked at differently  these representative videos and graphics of  mission shakti   launched prime minister modi into another stratosphere of election campaign  a republic tv anchor lauded his  political will  to  show military might . or as  defence expert  there are so many of them around on tv these days   r.p. singh said   what modi has done  no one has done. why was the missile tested now  why did pm modi have to make the announcement  modi neither said nor did the tv news channels ask. it didn t matter   tv news was either busy celebrating or trying to understand the exact nature and implication of the achievement.  it is a big deal   explained pallava bagla  science editor with ndtv   it is a very important demonstration of weaponisation of space capability. also read  india s a sat missile strike added to space debris like kanpur adds sewage to gangathat may be  but to the ordinary eye  the tv narrative of  india declares war on space  was simply a continuation of the iaf balakot airstrikes all those flying machines zipping in and out of the screen bore a striking resemblance to the fighter jets we saw just the other day.so was the chest thumping   india is ready for space warfare   republic tv  with its  space weapons     our satellite killer  is ready  india today  and the  world  is  watching amazed   news x . that led to the customary political war games that broke out immediately following modi s  masterstroke   cnn news   . even as zee news wondered if  jai kisan  jai jawan and jai vigyan  would be the bjp s latest poll weapon could it replace  main chowkidar hoon   congress president rahul gandhi fired his first salvo  he complimented the drdo and wished the pm  happy world theatre day .union minister arun jaitley came out all guns blazing at a press conference where he congratulated the  visionary pm  and attacked the  clerical  opposition.we are deeply grateful to our readers   viewers for their time  trust and subscriptions. quality journalism is expensive and needs readers to pay for it. your support will define our work and theprint s future. subscribe nowmeanwhile  india today reported that the cpm complained to the election commission that modi s live broadcast was a  clear violation  of the model code of conduct.the saga will continue but for a day  this space odyssey of  bharat mazboot   as the pm called it   certainly changed the media message.in fact  the pm could have announced virtually anything and it would have had the same impact. with one tweet  wednesday morning  saying he would address the nation  the pm took over the news cycle for much of the day and diverted the course of the narrative.for two days  the media had been consumed with news and views on congress s minimum income guarantee scheme. in one fell swoop  pm modi eliminated nyay from the headlines and replaced it with modi s star wars.tv news coverage of his address  before he delivered it  also said a lot about the news channels  they can always conjure up something out of nothing. no one knew what  the important message  from the pm would contain in the  unprecedented  broadcast  india today .  is it a decision  a piece of information   wondered republic tv s anchor.perhaps it s about the capture of  a terrorist mastermind   said the times now anchor  almost wistful. there s heavy firing along the loc   warned republic tv. join the dots   advised india today s gaurav sawant in a most superior voice   it has to be security related i am speculating. bhupendra chaubey s speculation led him further astray   i think it s the economy   he predicted  cnn news   .also read  how air   doordarshan beat ec s model code to air pm modi s a sat speechand when anchor rahul shiv shankar claimed on times now   it is related to external affairs   he didn t realise how close he was to the truth. he then added the most important point about the tv address   it could have an impact on the elections  on the discourse  india today s ankit tyagi agreed    this  is aimed at the elections   it gives modi  a massive advantage. and so  the speculation  like the suspense  continued for a good hour before pm modi revealed something none had imagined in their wildest speculations.but then  more often than not  speculation on tv news is dubious.here s an example   the on off congress aap alliance in delhi. last week  ndtv      had sealed the deal. it never happened. tuesday morning  news x announced with fanfare   alliance done in delhi  and  congress   seats  aap   . india news also said the  deal was through . india today  accesses inside details seat sharing is being worked out      formula . times now agreed  adding that  rahul to take final call . where times now goes  republic is sure to follow and vice versa so it ran a headline   cong aap alliance  soon after   pm  congress delhi chief sheila dikshit held a press conference where she praised the nyay scheme. there was no mention of an alliance.that put news x in two minds  it said the alliance was  likely   however  sources said the deal was  sealed .on tv s news cycle  they go round and round in circles.subscribe to our channels on youtube   telegramnews media is in a crisis   only you can fix it you are reading this because you value good  intelligent and objective journalism. we thank you for your time and your trust. you also know that the news media is facing an unprecedented crisis. it is likely that you are also hearing of the brutal layoffs and pay cuts hitting the industry. there are many reasons why the media s economics is broken. but a big one is that good people are not yet paying enough for good journalism. we have a newsroom filled with talented young reporters. we also have the country s most robust editing and fact checking team  finest news photographers and video professionals. we are building india s most ambitious and energetic news platform. and we aren t even three yet. at theprint  we invest in quality journalists. we pay them fairly and on time even in this difficult period. as you may have noticed  we do not flinch from spending whatever it takes to make sure our reporters reach where the story is. our stellar coronavirus coverage is a good example. you can check some of it here. this comes with a sizable cost. for us to continue bringing quality journalism  we need readers like you to pay for it. because the advertising market is broken too. if you think we deserve your support  do join us in this endeavour to strengthen fair  free  courageous  and questioning journalism  please click on the link below. your support will define our journalism  and theprint s future. it will take just a few seconds of your time. support our journalismshow full article




